This is ../../info/emacs, produced by makeinfo version 4.13 from
emacs.texi.

This is the Sixteenth edition of the `GNU Emacs Manual',
updated for Emacs version 23.3.

   Copyright (C) 1985, 1986, 1987, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998,
1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010,
2011  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
     document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
     Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
     Foundation; with the Invariant Sections being "The GNU Manifesto,"
     "Distribution" and "GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE," with the
     Front-Cover texts being "A GNU Manual," and with the Back-Cover
     Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license is included in the
     section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License."

     (a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: "You have the freedom to copy and
     modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF supports it in
     developing GNU and promoting software freedom."

INFO-DIR-SECTION Emacs
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Emacs: (emacs).       The extensible self-documenting text editor.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY


File: emacs,  Node: Manifesto,  Prev: Microsoft Windows,  Up: Top

The GNU Manifesto
*****************

     The GNU Manifesto which appears below was written by Richard
     Stallman at the beginning of the GNU project, to ask for
     participation and support.  For the first few years, it was
     updated in minor ways to account for developments, but now it
     seems best to leave it unchanged as most people have seen it.

     Since that time, we have learned about certain common
     misunderstandings that different wording could help avoid.
     Footnotes added in 1993 help clarify these points.

     For up-to-date information about available GNU software, please see
     our web site, `http://www.gnu.org'.  For software tasks and other
     ways to contribute, see `http://www.gnu.org/help'.

What's GNU?  Gnu's Not Unix!
============================

GNU, which stands for Gnu's Not Unix, is the name for the complete
Unix-compatible software system which I am writing so that I can give it
away free to everyone who can use it.(1) Several other volunteers are
helping me.  Contributions of time, money, programs and equipment are
greatly needed.

   So far we have an Emacs text editor with Lisp for writing editor
commands, a source level debugger, a yacc-compatible parser generator,
a linker, and around 35 utilities.  A shell (command interpreter) is
nearly completed.  A new portable optimizing C compiler has compiled
itself and may be released this year.  An initial kernel exists but
many more features are needed to emulate Unix.  When the kernel and
compiler are finished, it will be possible to distribute a GNU system
suitable for program development.  We will use TeX as our text
formatter, but an nroff is being worked on.  We will use the free,
portable X window system as well.  After this we will add a portable
Common Lisp, an Empire game, a spreadsheet, and hundreds of other
things, plus on-line documentation.  We hope to supply, eventually,
everything useful that normally comes with a Unix system, and more.

   GNU will be able to run Unix programs, but will not be identical to
Unix.  We will make all improvements that are convenient, based on our
experience with other operating systems.  In particular, we plan to
have longer file names, file version numbers, a crashproof file system,
file name completion perhaps, terminal-independent display support, and
perhaps eventually a Lisp-based window system through which several
Lisp programs and ordinary Unix programs can share a screen.  Both C
and Lisp will be available as system programming languages.  We will
try to support UUCP, MIT Chaosnet, and Internet protocols for
communication.

   GNU is aimed initially at machines in the 68000/16000 class with
virtual memory, because they are the easiest machines to make it run
on.  The extra effort to make it run on smaller machines will be left
to someone who wants to use it on them.

   To avoid horrible confusion, please pronounce the `G' in the word
`GNU' when it is the name of this project.

Why I Must Write GNU
====================

I consider that the golden rule requires that if I like a program I must
share it with other people who like it.  Software sellers want to divide
the users and conquer them, making each user agree not to share with
others.  I refuse to break solidarity with other users in this way.  I
cannot in good conscience sign a nondisclosure agreement or a software
license agreement.  For years I worked within the Artificial
Intelligence Lab to resist such tendencies and other inhospitalities,
but eventually they had gone too far: I could not remain in an
institution where such things are done for me against my will.

   So that I can continue to use computers without dishonor, I have
decided to put together a sufficient body of free software so that I
will be able to get along without any software that is not free.  I
have resigned from the AI lab to deny MIT any legal excuse to prevent
me from giving GNU away.

Why GNU Will Be Compatible with Unix
====================================

Unix is not my ideal system, but it is not too bad.  The essential
features of Unix seem to be good ones, and I think I can fill in what
Unix lacks without spoiling them.  And a system compatible with Unix
would be convenient for many other people to adopt.

How GNU Will Be Available
=========================

GNU is not in the public domain.  Everyone will be permitted to modify
and redistribute GNU, but no distributor will be allowed to restrict its
further redistribution.  That is to say, proprietary modifications will
not be allowed.  I want to make sure that all versions of GNU remain
free.

Why Many Other Programmers Want to Help
=======================================

I have found many other programmers who are excited about GNU and want
to help.

   Many programmers are unhappy about the commercialization of system
software.  It may enable them to make more money, but it requires them
to feel in conflict with other programmers in general rather than feel
as comrades.  The fundamental act of friendship among programmers is the
sharing of programs; marketing arrangements now typically used
essentially forbid programmers to treat others as friends.  The
purchaser of software must choose between friendship and obeying the
law.  Naturally, many decide that friendship is more important.  But
those who believe in law often do not feel at ease with either choice.
They become cynical and think that programming is just a way of making
money.

   By working on and using GNU rather than proprietary programs, we can
be hospitable to everyone and obey the law.  In addition, GNU serves as
an example to inspire and a banner to rally others to join us in
sharing.  This can give us a feeling of harmony which is impossible if
we use software that is not free.  For about half the programmers I
talk to, this is an important happiness that money cannot replace.

How You Can Contribute
======================

I am asking computer manufacturers for donations of machines and money.
I'm asking individuals for donations of programs and work.

   One consequence you can expect if you donate machines is that GNU
will run on them at an early date.  The machines should be complete,
ready to use systems, approved for use in a residential area, and not
in need of sophisticated cooling or power.

   I have found very many programmers eager to contribute part-time
work for GNU.  For most projects, such part-time distributed work would
be very hard to coordinate; the independently-written parts would not
work together.  But for the particular task of replacing Unix, this
problem is absent.  A complete Unix system contains hundreds of utility
programs, each of which is documented separately.  Most interface
specifications are fixed by Unix compatibility.  If each contributor
can write a compatible replacement for a single Unix utility, and make
it work properly in place of the original on a Unix system, then these
utilities will work right when put together.  Even allowing for Murphy
to create a few unexpected problems, assembling these components will
be a feasible task.  (The kernel will require closer communication and
will be worked on by a small, tight group.)

   If I get donations of money, I may be able to hire a few people full
or part time.  The salary won't be high by programmers' standards, but
I'm looking for people for whom building community spirit is as
important as making money.  I view this as a way of enabling dedicated
people to devote their full energies to working on GNU by sparing them
the need to make a living in another way.

Why All Computer Users Will Benefit
===================================

Once GNU is written, everyone will be able to obtain good system
software free, just like air.(2)

   This means much more than just saving everyone the price of a Unix
license.  It means that much wasteful duplication of system programming
effort will be avoided.  This effort can go instead into advancing the
state of the art.

   Complete system sources will be available to everyone.  As a result,
a user who needs changes in the system will always be free to make them
himself, or hire any available programmer or company to make them for
him.  Users will no longer be at the mercy of one programmer or company
which owns the sources and is in sole position to make changes.

   Schools will be able to provide a much more educational environment
by encouraging all students to study and improve the system code.
Harvard's computer lab used to have the policy that no program could be
installed on the system if its sources were not on public display, and
upheld it by actually refusing to install certain programs.  I was very
much inspired by this.

   Finally, the overhead of considering who owns the system software
and what one is or is not entitled to do with it will be lifted.

   Arrangements to make people pay for using a program, including
licensing of copies, always incur a tremendous cost to society through
the cumbersome mechanisms necessary to figure out how much (that is,
which programs) a person must pay for.  And only a police state can
force everyone to obey them.  Consider a space station where air must
be manufactured at great cost: charging each breather per liter of air
may be fair, but wearing the metered gas mask all day and all night is
intolerable even if everyone can afford to pay the air bill.  And the
TV cameras everywhere to see if you ever take the mask off are
outrageous.  It's better to support the air plant with a head tax and
chuck the masks.

   Copying all or parts of a program is as natural to a programmer as
breathing, and as productive.  It ought to be as free.

Some Easily Rebutted Objections to GNU's Goals
==============================================

     "Nobody will use it if it is free, because that means they can't
     rely on any support."

     "You have to charge for the program to pay for providing the
     support."

   If people would rather pay for GNU plus service than get GNU free
without service, a company to provide just service to people who have
obtained GNU free ought to be profitable.(3)

   We must distinguish between support in the form of real programming
work and mere handholding.  The former is something one cannot rely on
from a software vendor.  If your problem is not shared by enough
people, the vendor will tell you to get lost.

   If your business needs to be able to rely on support, the only way
is to have all the necessary sources and tools.  Then you can hire any
available person to fix your problem; you are not at the mercy of any
individual.  With Unix, the price of sources puts this out of
consideration for most businesses.  With GNU this will be easy.  It is
still possible for there to be no available competent person, but this
problem cannot be blamed on distribution arrangements.  GNU does not
eliminate all the world's problems, only some of them.

   Meanwhile, the users who know nothing about computers need
handholding: doing things for them which they could easily do
themselves but don't know how.

   Such services could be provided by companies that sell just
hand-holding and repair service.  If it is true that users would rather
spend money and get a product with service, they will also be willing
to buy the service having got the product free.  The service companies
will compete in quality and price; users will not be tied to any
particular one.  Meanwhile, those of us who don't need the service
should be able to use the program without paying for the service.

     "You cannot reach many people without advertising, and you must
     charge for the program to support that."

     "It's no use advertising a program people can get free."

   There are various forms of free or very cheap publicity that can be
used to inform numbers of computer users about something like GNU.  But
it may be true that one can reach more microcomputer users with
advertising.  If this is really so, a business which advertises the
service of copying and mailing GNU for a fee ought to be successful
enough to pay for its advertising and more.  This way, only the users
who benefit from the advertising pay for it.

   On the other hand, if many people get GNU from their friends, and
such companies don't succeed, this will show that advertising was not
really necessary to spread GNU.  Why is it that free market advocates
don't want to let the free market decide this?(4)

     "My company needs a proprietary operating system to get a
     competitive edge."

   GNU will remove operating system software from the realm of
competition.  You will not be able to get an edge in this area, but
neither will your competitors be able to get an edge over you.  You and
they will compete in other areas, while benefiting mutually in this
one.  If your business is selling an operating system, you will not
like GNU, but that's tough on you.  If your business is something else,
GNU can save you from being pushed into the expensive business of
selling operating systems.

   I would like to see GNU development supported by gifts from many
manufacturers and users, reducing the cost to each.(5)

     "Don't programmers deserve a reward for their creativity?"

   If anything deserves a reward, it is social contribution.
Creativity can be a social contribution, but only in so far as society
is free to use the results.  If programmers deserve to be rewarded for
creating innovative programs, by the same token they deserve to be
punished if they restrict the use of these programs.

     "Shouldn't a programmer be able to ask for a reward for his
     creativity?"

   There is nothing wrong with wanting pay for work, or seeking to
maximize one's income, as long as one does not use means that are
destructive.  But the means customary in the field of software today
are based on destruction.

   Extracting money from users of a program by restricting their use of
it is destructive because the restrictions reduce the amount and the
ways that the program can be used.  This reduces the amount of wealth
that humanity derives from the program.  When there is a deliberate
choice to restrict, the harmful consequences are deliberate destruction.

   The reason a good citizen does not use such destructive means to
become wealthier is that, if everyone did so, we would all become
poorer from the mutual destructiveness.  This is Kantian ethics; or,
the Golden Rule.  Since I do not like the consequences that result if
everyone hoards information, I am required to consider it wrong for one
to do so.  Specifically, the desire to be rewarded for one's creativity
does not justify depriving the world in general of all or part of that
creativity.

     "Won't programmers starve?"

   I could answer that nobody is forced to be a programmer.  Most of us
cannot manage to get any money for standing on the street and making
faces.  But we are not, as a result, condemned to spend our lives
standing on the street making faces, and starving.  We do something
else.

   But that is the wrong answer because it accepts the questioner's
implicit assumption: that without ownership of software, programmers
cannot possibly be paid a cent.  Supposedly it is all or nothing.

   The real reason programmers will not starve is that it will still be
possible for them to get paid for programming; just not paid as much as
now.

   Restricting copying is not the only basis for business in software.
It is the most common basis because it brings in the most money.  If it
were prohibited, or rejected by the customer, software business would
move to other bases of organization which are now used less often.
There are always numerous ways to organize any kind of business.

   Probably programming will not be as lucrative on the new basis as it
is now.  But that is not an argument against the change.  It is not
considered an injustice that sales clerks make the salaries that they
now do.  If programmers made the same, that would not be an injustice
either.  (In practice they would still make considerably more than
that.)

     "Don't people have a right to control how their creativity is
     used?"

   "Control over the use of one's ideas" really constitutes control over
other people's lives; and it is usually used to make their lives more
difficult.

   People who have studied the issue of intellectual property rights(6)
carefully (such as lawyers) say that there is no intrinsic right to
intellectual property.  The kinds of supposed intellectual property
rights that the government recognizes were created by specific acts of
legislation for specific purposes.

   For example, the patent system was established to encourage
inventors to disclose the details of their inventions.  Its purpose was
to help society rather than to help inventors.  At the time, the life
span of 17 years for a patent was short compared with the rate of
advance of the state of the art.  Since patents are an issue only among
manufacturers, for whom the cost and effort of a license agreement are
small compared with setting up production, the patents often do not do
much harm.  They do not obstruct most individuals who use patented
products.

   The idea of copyright did not exist in ancient times, when authors
frequently copied other authors at length in works of non-fiction.  This
practice was useful, and is the only way many authors' works have
survived even in part.  The copyright system was created expressly for
the purpose of encouraging authorship.  In the domain for which it was
invented--books, which could be copied economically only on a printing
press--it did little harm, and did not obstruct most of the individuals
who read the books.

   All intellectual property rights are just licenses granted by society
because it was thought, rightly or wrongly, that society as a whole
would benefit by granting them.  But in any particular situation, we
have to ask: are we really better off granting such license?  What kind
of act are we licensing a person to do?

   The case of programs today is very different from that of books a
hundred years ago.  The fact that the easiest way to copy a program is
from one neighbor to another, the fact that a program has both source
code and object code which are distinct, and the fact that a program is
used rather than read and enjoyed, combine to create a situation in
which a person who enforces a copyright is harming society as a whole
both materially and spiritually; in which a person should not do so
regardless of whether the law enables him to.

     "Competition makes things get done better."

   The paradigm of competition is a race: by rewarding the winner, we
encourage everyone to run faster.  When capitalism really works this
way, it does a good job; but its defenders are wrong in assuming it
always works this way.  If the runners forget why the reward is offered
and become intent on winning, no matter how, they may find other
strategies--such as, attacking other runners.  If the runners get into
a fist fight, they will all finish late.

   Proprietary and secret software is the moral equivalent of runners
in a fist fight.  Sad to say, the only referee we've got does not seem
to object to fights; he just regulates them ("For every ten yards you
run, you can fire one shot").  He really ought to break them up, and
penalize runners for even trying to fight.

     "Won't everyone stop programming without a monetary incentive?"

   Actually, many people will program with absolutely no monetary
incentive.  Programming has an irresistible fascination for some
people, usually the people who are best at it.  There is no shortage of
professional musicians who keep at it even though they have no hope of
making a living that way.

   But really this question, though commonly asked, is not appropriate
to the situation.  Pay for programmers will not disappear, only become
less.  So the right question is, will anyone program with a reduced
monetary incentive?  My experience shows that they will.

   For more than ten years, many of the world's best programmers worked
at the Artificial Intelligence Lab for far less money than they could
have had anywhere else.  They got many kinds of non-monetary rewards:
fame and appreciation, for example.  And creativity is also fun, a
reward in itself.

   Then most of them left when offered a chance to do the same
interesting work for a lot of money.

   What the facts show is that people will program for reasons other
than riches; but if given a chance to make a lot of money as well, they
will come to expect and demand it.  Low-paying organizations do poorly
in competition with high-paying ones, but they do not have to do badly
if the high-paying ones are banned.

     "We need the programmers desperately.  If they demand that we stop
     helping our neighbors, we have to obey."

   You're never so desperate that you have to obey this sort of demand.
Remember: millions for defense, but not a cent for tribute!

     "Programmers need to make a living somehow."

   In the short run, this is true.  However, there are plenty of ways
that programmers could make a living without selling the right to use a
program.  This way is customary now because it brings programmers and
businessmen the most money, not because it is the only way to make a
living.  It is easy to find other ways if you want to find them.  Here
are a number of examples.

   A manufacturer introducing a new computer will pay for the porting of
operating systems onto the new hardware.

   The sale of teaching, hand-holding and maintenance services could
also employ programmers.

   People with new ideas could distribute programs as freeware(7),
asking for donations from satisfied users, or selling hand-holding
services.  I have met people who are already working this way
successfully.

   Users with related needs can form users' groups, and pay dues.  A
group would contract with programming companies to write programs that
the group's members would like to use.

   All sorts of development can be funded with a Software Tax:

     Suppose everyone who buys a computer has to pay x percent of the
     price as a software tax.  The government gives this to an agency
     like the NSF to spend on software development.

     But if the computer buyer makes a donation to software development
     himself, he can take a credit against the tax.  He can donate to
     the project of his own choosing--often, chosen because he hopes to
     use the results when it is done.  He can take a credit for any
     amount of donation up to the total tax he had to pay.

     The total tax rate could be decided by a vote of the payers of the
     tax, weighted according to the amount they will be taxed on.

     The consequences:

        * The computer-using community supports software development.

        * This community decides what level of support is needed.

        * Users who care which projects their share is spent on can
          choose this for themselves.

   In the long run, making programs free is a step toward the
post-scarcity world, where nobody will have to work very hard just to
make a living.  People will be free to devote themselves to activities
that are fun, such as programming, after spending the necessary ten
hours a week on required tasks such as legislation, family counseling,
robot repair and asteroid prospecting.  There will be no need to be
able to make a living from programming.

   We have already greatly reduced the amount of work that the whole
society must do for its actual productivity, but only a little of this
has translated itself into leisure for workers because much
nonproductive activity is required to accompany productive activity.
The main causes of this are bureaucracy and isometric struggles against
competition.  Free software will greatly reduce these drains in the
area of software production.  We must do this, in order for technical
gains in productivity to translate into less work for us.

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) The wording here was careless.  The intention was that nobody
would have to pay for _permission_ to use the GNU system.  But the
words don't make this clear, and people often interpret them as saying
that copies of GNU should always be distributed at little or no charge.
That was never the intent; later on, the manifesto mentions the
possibility of companies providing the service of distribution for a
profit.  Subsequently I have learned to distinguish carefully between
"free" in the sense of freedom and "free" in the sense of price.  Free
software is software that users have the freedom to distribute and
change.  Some users may obtain copies at no charge, while others pay to
obtain copies--and if the funds help support improving the software, so
much the better.  The important thing is that everyone who has a copy
has the freedom to cooperate with others in using it.

   (2) This is another place I failed to distinguish carefully between
the two different meanings of "free."  The statement as it stands is
not false--you can get copies of GNU software at no charge, from your
friends or over the net.  But it does suggest the wrong idea.

   (3) Several such companies now exist.

   (4) The Free Software Foundation raises most of its funds from a
distribution service, although it is a charity rather than a company.
If _no one_ chooses to obtain copies by ordering from the FSF, it will
be unable to do its work.  But this does not mean that proprietary
restrictions are justified to force every user to pay.  If a small
fraction of all the users order copies from the FSF, that is sufficient
to keep the FSF afloat.  So we ask users to choose to support us in
this way.  Have you done your part?

   (5) A group of computer companies recently pooled funds to support
maintenance of the GNU C Compiler.

   (6) In the 80s I had not yet realized how confusing it was to speak
of "the issue" of "intellectual property."  That term is obviously
biased; more subtle is the fact that it lumps together various
disparate laws which raise very different issues.  Nowadays I urge
people to reject the term "intellectual property" entirely, lest it
lead others to suppose that those laws form one coherent issue.  The
way to be clear is to discuss patents, copyrights, and trademarks
separately.  See `http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/not-ipr.xhtml' for more
explanation of how this term spreads confusion and bias.

   (7) Subsequently we have discovered the need to distinguish between
"free software" and "freeware".  The term "freeware" means software you
are free to redistribute, but usually you are not free to study and
change the source code, so most of it is not free software.  See
`http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/words-to-avoid.html' for more
explanation.


File: emacs,  Node: Glossary,  Next: Key Index,  Prev: Intro,  Up: Top

Glossary
********

Abbrev
     An abbrev is a text string which expands into a different text
     string when present in the buffer.  For example, you might define
     a few letters as an abbrev for a long phrase that you want to
     insert frequently.  *Note Abbrevs::.

Aborting
     Aborting means getting out of a recursive edit (q.v.).  The
     commands `C-]' and `M-x top-level' are used for this.  *Note
     Quitting::.

Alt
     Alt is the name of a modifier bit that a keyboard input character
     may have.  To make a character Alt, type it while holding down the
     <ALT> key.  Such characters are given names that start with `Alt-'
     (usually written `A-' for short).  (Note that many terminals have a
     key labeled <ALT> that is really a <META> key.)  *Note Alt: User
     Input.

Argument
     See `numeric argument.'

ASCII character
     An ASCII character is either an ASCII control character or an
     ASCII printing character.  *Note User Input::.

ASCII control character
     An ASCII control character is the Control version of an upper-case
     letter, or the Control version of one of the characters `@[\]^_?'.

ASCII printing character
     ASCII printing characters include letters, digits, space, and these
     punctuation characters: `!@#$%^& *()_-+=|\~` {}[]:;"' <>,.?/'.

Auto Fill Mode
     Auto Fill mode is a minor mode (q.v.) in which text that you
     insert is automatically broken into lines of a given maximum width.
     *Note Filling::.

Auto Saving
     Auto saving is the practice of periodically saving the contents of
     an Emacs buffer in a specially-named file, so that the information
     will be preserved if the buffer is lost due to a system error or
     user error.  *Note Auto Save::.

Autoloading
     Emacs can automatically load Lisp libraries when a Lisp program
     requests a function from those libraries.  This is called
     `autoloading.'  *Note Lisp Libraries::.

Backtrace
     A backtrace is a trace of a series of function calls showing how a
     program arrived at a certain point.  It is used mainly for finding
     and correcting bugs (q.v.).  Emacs can display a backtrace when it
     signals an error or when you type `C-g' (see `quitting').  *Note
     Checklist::.

Backup File
     A backup file records the contents that a file had before the
     current editing session.  Emacs makes backup files automatically
     to help you track down or cancel changes you later regret making.
     *Note Backup::.

Balancing Parentheses
     Emacs can balance parentheses (or other matching delimiters) either
     manually or automatically.  You do manual balancing with the
     commands to move over parenthetical groupings (*note Moving by
     Parens::).  Automatic balancing works by blinking or highlighting
     the delimiter that matches the one you just inserted (*note
     Matching Parens: Matching.).

Balanced Expressions
     A balanced expression is a syntactically recognizable expression,
     such as a symbol, number, string constant, block, or parenthesized
     expression in C.  *Note Balanced Expressions: Expressions.

Balloon Help
     See `tooltips.'

Base Buffer
     A base buffer is a buffer whose text is shared by an indirect
     buffer (q.v.).

Bind
     To bind a key sequence means to give it a binding (q.v.).  *Note
     Rebinding::.

Binding
     A key sequence gets its meaning in Emacs by having a binding,
     which is a command (q.v.), a Lisp function that is run when you
     type that sequence.  *Note Binding: Commands.  Customization often
     involves rebinding a character to a different command function.
     The bindings of all key sequences are recorded in the keymaps
     (q.v.).  *Note Keymaps::.

Blank Lines
     Blank lines are lines that contain only whitespace.  Emacs has
     several commands for operating on the blank lines in the buffer.

Bookmark
     Bookmarks are akin to registers (q.v.) in that they record
     positions in buffers to which you can return later.  Unlike
     registers, bookmarks persist between Emacs sessions.

Border
     A border is a thin space along the edge of the frame, used just for
     spacing, not for displaying anything.  An Emacs frame has an
     ordinary external border, outside of everything including the menu
     bar, plus an internal border that surrounds the text windows,
     their scroll bars and fringes, and separates them from the menu
     bar and tool bar.  You can customize both borders with options and
     resources (*note Borders X::).  Borders are not the same as
     fringes (q.v.).

Buffer
     The buffer is the basic editing unit; one buffer corresponds to
     one text being edited.  You can have several buffers, but at any
     time you are editing only one, the `current buffer,' though
     several can be visible when you are using multiple windows or
     frames (q.v.).  Most buffers are visiting (q.v.) some file.  *Note
     Buffers::.

Buffer Selection History
     Emacs keeps a buffer selection history which records how recently
     each Emacs buffer has been selected.  This is used for choosing a
     buffer to select.  *Note Buffers::.

Bug
     A bug is an incorrect or unreasonable behavior of a program, or
     inaccurate or confusing documentation.  Emacs developers treat bug
     reports, both in Emacs code and its documentation, very seriously
     and ask you to report any bugs you find.  *Note Bugs::.

Button Down Event
     A button down event is the kind of input event (q.v.) generated
     right away when you press down on a mouse button.  *Note Mouse
     Buttons::.

By Default
     See `default.'

Byte Compilation
     See `compilation.'

`C-'
     `C-' in the name of a character is an abbreviation for Control.
     *Note C-: User Input.

`C-M-'
     `C-M-' in the name of a character is an abbreviation for
     Control-Meta.  If your terminal lacks a real <META> key, you type
     a Control-Meta character by typing <ESC> and then typing the
     corresponding Control character.  *Note C-M-: User Input.

Case Conversion
     Case conversion means changing text from upper case to lower case
     or vice versa.  *Note Case::, for the commands for case conversion.

Character
     Characters form the contents of an Emacs buffer.  Also, key
     sequences (q.v.) are usually made up of characters (though they
     may include other input events as well).  *Note User Input::.

Character Set
     Emacs supports a number of character sets, each of which
     represents a particular alphabet or script.  *Note International::.

Character Terminal
     See `text-only terminal.'

Click Event
     A click event is the kind of input event (q.v.) generated when you
     press a mouse button and release it without moving the mouse.
     *Note Mouse Buttons::.

Clipboard
     A clipboard is a buffer provided by the window system for
     transferring text between applications.  On the X Window system,
     the clipboard is provided in addition to the primary selection
     (q.v.); on MS-Windows and Mac, the clipboard is used _instead_ of
     the primary selection.  *Note Clipboard::.

Coding System
     A coding system is an encoding for representing text characters in
     a file or in a stream of information.  Emacs has the ability to
     convert text to or from a variety of coding systems when reading
     or writing it.  *Note Coding Systems::.

Command
     A command is a Lisp function specially defined to be able to serve
     as a key binding in Emacs.  When you type a key sequence (q.v.),
     its binding (q.v.) is looked up in the relevant keymaps (q.v.) to
     find the command to run.  *Note Commands::.

Command History
     See `minibuffer history.'

Command Name
     A command name is the name of a Lisp symbol which is a command
     (*note Commands::).  You can invoke any command by its name using
     `M-x' (*note M-x: M-x.).

Comment
     A comment is text in a program which is intended only for humans
     reading the program, and which is specially marked so that it will
     be ignored when the program is loaded or compiled.  Emacs offers
     special commands for creating, aligning and killing comments.
     *Note Comments::.

Common Lisp
     Common Lisp is a dialect of Lisp (q.v.) much larger and more
     powerful than Emacs Lisp.  Emacs provides a subset of Common Lisp
     in the CL package.  *Note Common Lisp: (cl)Top.

Compilation
     Compilation is the process of creating an executable program from
     source code.  Emacs has commands for compiling files of Emacs Lisp
     code (*note Byte Compilation: (elisp)Byte Compilation.) and
     programs in C and other languages (*note Compilation::).

Complete Key
     A complete key is a key sequence which fully specifies one action
     to be performed by Emacs.  For example, `X' and `C-f' and `C-x m'
     are complete keys.  Complete keys derive their meanings from being
     bound (q.v.) to commands (q.v.).  Thus, `X' is conventionally
     bound to a command to insert `X' in the buffer; `C-x m' is
     conventionally bound to a command to begin composing a mail
     message.  *Note Keys::.

Completion
     Completion is what Emacs does when it automatically expands an
     abbreviation for a name into the entire name.  Completion is done
     for minibuffer (q.v.) arguments when the set of possible valid
     inputs is known; for example, on command names, buffer names, and
     file names.  Completion usually occurs when <TAB>, <SPC> or <RET>
     is typed.  *Note Completion::.

Continuation Line
     When a line of text is longer than the width of the window, it
     normally (but see `Truncation') takes up more than one screen line
     when displayed.  We say that the text line is continued, and all
     screen lines used for it after the first are called continuation
     lines.  *Note Continuation Lines::.  A related Emacs feature is
     `filling' (q.v.).

Control Character
     A control character is a character that you type by holding down
     the <CTRL> key.  Some control characters also have their own keys,
     so that you can type them without using <CTRL>.  For example,
     <RET>, <TAB>, <ESC> and <DEL> are all control characters.  *Note
     User Input::.

Copyleft
     A copyleft is a notice giving the public legal permission to
     redistribute and modify a program or other work of art, but
     requiring modified versions to carry similar permission.
     Copyright is normally used to keep users divided and helpless;
     with copyleft we turn that around to empower users and encourage
     them to cooperate.

     The particular form of copyleft used by the GNU project is called
     the GNU General Public License.  *Note Copying::.

<CTRL>
     The <CTRL> or "control" key is what you hold down in order to
     enter a control character (q.v.).  See also ``C-'.'

Current Buffer
     The current buffer in Emacs is the Emacs buffer on which most
     editing commands operate.  You can select any Emacs buffer as the
     current one.  *Note Buffers::.

Current Line
     The current line is the line that point is on (*note Point::).

Current Paragraph
     The current paragraph is the paragraph that point is in.  If point
     is between two paragraphs, the current paragraph is the one that
     follows point.  *Note Paragraphs::.

Current Defun
     The current defun is the defun (q.v.) that point is in.  If point
     is between defuns, the current defun is the one that follows point.
     *Note Defuns::.

Cursor
     The cursor is the rectangle on the screen which indicates the
     position (called point; q.v.) at which insertion and deletion
     takes place.  The cursor is on or under the character that follows
     point.  Often people speak of `the cursor' when, strictly
     speaking, they mean `point.'  *Note Cursor: Point.

Customization
     Customization is making minor changes in the way Emacs works, to
     reflect your preferences or needs.  It is often done by setting
     variables (*note Variables::) or faces (*note Face
     Customization::), or by rebinding key sequences (*note Keymaps::).

Cut and Paste
     See `killing' and `yanking.'

Daemon
     A daemon is a standard term for a system-level process that runs
     in the background.  Daemons are often started when the system
     first starts up.  When Emacs runs in daemon-mode, it runs in the
     background and does not open a display.  You can then connect to
     it with the `emacsclient' program.  *Note Emacs Server::.

Default Argument
     The default for an argument is the value that will be assumed if
     you do not specify one.  When the minibuffer is used to read an
     argument, the default argument is used if you just type <RET>.
     *Note Minibuffer::.

Default
     A default is the value that is used for a certain purpose if and
     when you do not specify a value to use.

Default Directory
     When you specify a file name that does not start with `/' or `~',
     it is interpreted relative to the current buffer's default
     directory.  (On MS-Windows and MS-DOS, file names which start with
     a drive letter `X:' are treated as absolute, not relative.)  *Note
     Default Directory: Minibuffer File.

Defun
     A defun is a major definition at the top level in a program.  The
     name `defun' comes from Lisp, where most such definitions use the
     construct `defun'.  *Note Defuns::.

<DEL>
     <DEL> is a character that runs the command to delete one character
     of text before the cursor.  It is typically either the <DELETE>
     key or the <BACKSPACE> key, whichever one is easy to type.  *Note
     DEL: Erasing.

Deletion
     Deletion means erasing text without copying it into the kill ring
     (q.v.).  The alternative is killing (q.v.).  *Note Deletion:
     Killing.

Deletion of Files
     Deleting a file means erasing it from the file system.  (Note that
     some systems use the concept of a "trash can", or "recycle bin",
     to allow you to "undelete" files.)  *Note Misc File Ops: Misc File
     Ops.

Deletion of Messages
     Deleting a message (in Rmail, and other mail clients) means
     flagging it to be eliminated from your mail file.  Until you
     expunge (q.v.)  the Rmail file, you can still undelete the
     messages you have deleted.  *Note Rmail Deletion::.

Deletion of Windows
     Deleting a window means eliminating it from the screen.  Other
     windows expand to use up the space.  The text that was in the
     window is not lost, and you can create a new window with the same
     dimensions as the old if you wish.  *Note Windows::.

Directory
     File directories are named collections in the file system, within
     which you can place individual files or subdirectories.  They are
     sometimes referred to as "folders."  *Note Directories::.

Dired
     Dired is the Emacs facility that displays the contents of a file
     directory and allows you to "edit the directory," performing
     operations on the files in the directory.  *Note Dired::.

Disabled Command
     A disabled command is one that you may not run without special
     confirmation.  The usual reason for disabling a command is that it
     is confusing for beginning users.  *Note Disabling::.

Down Event
     Short for `button down event' (q.v.).

Drag Event
     A drag event is the kind of input event (q.v.) generated when you
     press a mouse button, move the mouse, and then release the button.
     *Note Mouse Buttons::.

Dribble File
     A dribble file is a file into which Emacs writes all the
     characters that you type on the keyboard.  Dribble files can be
     used to make a record for debugging Emacs bugs.  Emacs does not
     make a dribble file unless you tell it to.  *Note Bugs::.

Echo Area
     The echo area is the bottom line of the screen, used for echoing
     the arguments to commands, for asking questions, and showing brief
     messages (including error messages).  The messages are stored in
     the buffer `*Messages*' so you can review them later.  *Note Echo
     Area::.

Echoing
     Echoing is acknowledging the receipt of input events by displaying
     them (in the echo area).  Emacs never echoes single-character key
     sequences; longer key sequences echo only if you pause while typing
     them.

Electric
     We say that a character is electric if it is normally
     self-inserting (q.v.), but the current major mode (q.v.) redefines
     it to do something else as well.  For example, some programming
     language major modes define particular delimiter characters to
     reindent the line, or insert one or more newlines in addition to
     self-insertion.

End Of Line
     End of line is a character or a sequence of characters that
     indicate the end of a text line.  On GNU and Unix systems, this is
     a newline (q.v.), but other systems have other conventions.  *Note
     end-of-line: Coding Systems.  Emacs can recognize several
     end-of-line conventions in files and convert between them.

Environment Variable
     An environment variable is one of a collection of variables stored
     by the operating system, each one having a name and a value.
     Emacs can access environment variables set by its parent shell,
     and it can set variables in the environment it passes to programs
     it invokes.  *Note Environment::.

EOL
     See `end of line.'

Error
     An error occurs when an Emacs command cannot execute in the current
     circumstances.  When an error occurs, execution of the command
     stops (unless the command has been programmed to do otherwise) and
     Emacs reports the error by displaying an error message (q.v.).

Error Message
     An error message is output displayed by Emacs when you ask it to do
     something impossible (such as, killing text forward when point is
     at the end of the buffer), or when a command malfunctions in some
     way.  Such messages appear in the echo area, accompanied by a beep.

<ESC>
     <ESC> is a character used as a prefix for typing Meta characters on
     keyboards lacking a <META> key.  Unlike the <META> key (which,
     like the <SHIFT> key, is held down while another character is
     typed), you press the <ESC> key as you would press a letter key,
     and it applies to the next character you type.

Expression
     See `balanced expression.'

Expunging
     Expunging an Rmail, Gnus newsgroup, or Dired buffer is an operation
     that truly discards the messages or files you have previously
     flagged for deletion.

Face
     A face is a style of displaying characters.  It specifies
     attributes such as font family and size, foreground and background
     colors, underline and strike-through, background stipple, etc.
     Emacs provides features to associate specific faces with portions
     of buffer text, in order to display that text as specified by the
     face attributes.  *Note Faces::.

File Locking
     Emacs uses file locking to notice when two different users start
     to edit one file at the same time.  *Note Interlocking::.

File Name
     A file name is a name that refers to a file.  File names may be
     relative or absolute; the meaning of a relative file name depends
     on the current directory, but an absolute file name refers to the
     same file regardless of which directory is current.  On GNU and
     Unix systems, an absolute file name starts with a slash (the root
     directory) or with `~/' or `~USER/' (a home directory).  On
     MS-Windows/MS-DOS, an absolute file name can also start with a
     drive letter and a colon, e.g.  `D:'.

     Some people use the term "pathname" for file names, but we do not;
     we use the word "path" only in the term "search path" (q.v.).

File-Name Component
     A file-name component names a file directly within a particular
     directory.  On GNU and Unix systems, a file name is a sequence of
     file-name components, separated by slashes.  For example, `foo/bar'
     is a file name containing two components, `foo' and `bar'; it
     refers to the file named `bar' in the directory named `foo' in the
     current directory.  MS-DOS/MS-Windows file names can also use
     backslashes to separate components, as in `foo\bar'.

Fill Prefix
     The fill prefix is a string that should be expected at the
     beginning of each line when filling is done.  It is not regarded
     as part of the text to be filled.  *Note Filling::.

Filling
     Filling text means adjusting the position of line-breaks to shift
     text between consecutive lines, so that all the lines are
     approximately the same length.  *Note Filling::.  Some other
     editors call this feature `line wrapping.'

Font Lock
     Font Lock is a mode that highlights parts of buffer text in
     different faces, according to the syntax.  For example, all
     comments (q.v.)  might be colored red.  *Note Font Lock::.

Fontset
     A fontset is a named collection of fonts.  A fontset specification
     lists character sets and which font to use to display each of
     them.  Fontsets make it easy to change several fonts at once by
     specifying the name of a fontset, rather than changing each font
     separately.  *Note Fontsets::.

Formatted Text
     Formatted text is text that displays with formatting information
     while you edit.  Formatting information includes fonts, colors,
     and specified margins.  *Note Formatted Text::.

Formfeed Character
     See `page.'

Frame
     A frame is a rectangular cluster of Emacs windows.  Emacs starts
     out with one frame, but you can create more.  You can subdivide
     each frame into Emacs windows (q.v.).  When you are using a window
     system (q.v.), more than one frame can be visible at the same time.
     *Note Frames::.  Some other editors use the term "window" for this,
     but in Emacs a window means something else.

Free Software
     Free software is software that gives you the freedom to share,
     study and modify it.  Emacs is free software, part of the GNU
     project (q.v.), and distributed under a copyleft (q.v.) license
     called the GNU General Public License.  *Note Copying::.

Free Software Foundation
     The Free Software Foundation (FSF) is a charitable foundation
     dedicated to promoting the development of free software (q.v.).
     For more information, see the FSF website (http://fsf.org/).

Fringe
     On a graphical display (q.v.), there's a narrow portion of the
     frame (q.v.) between the text area and the window's border.  These
     `fringes' are used to display symbols that provide information
     about the buffer text (*note Fringes::).  Emacs displays the
     fringe using a special face (q.v.) called `fringe'.  *Note fringe:
     Faces.

FSF
     See `Free Software Foundation.'

FTP
     FTP is an acronym for File Transfer Protocol.  This is one standard
     method for retrieving remote files (q.v.).

Function Key
     A function key is a key on the keyboard that sends input but does
     not correspond to any character.  *Note Function Keys::.

Global
     Global means "independent of the current environment; in effect
     throughout Emacs."  It is the opposite of local (q.v.).  Particular
     examples of the use of `global' appear below.

Global Abbrev
     A global definition of an abbrev (q.v.) is effective in all major
     modes that do not have local (q.v.) definitions for the same
     abbrev.  *Note Abbrevs::.

Global Keymap
     The global keymap (q.v.) contains key bindings that are in effect
     everywhere, except when overridden by local key bindings in a major
     mode's local keymap (q.v.).  *Note Keymaps::.

Global Mark Ring
     The global mark ring records the series of buffers you have
     recently set a mark (q.v.) in.  In many cases you can use this to
     backtrack through buffers you have been editing, or in which you
     have found tags (see `tags table').  *Note Global Mark Ring::.

Global Substitution
     Global substitution means replacing each occurrence of one string
     by another string throughout a large amount of text.  *Note
     Replace::.

Global Variable
     The global value of a variable (q.v.) takes effect in all buffers
     that do not have their own local (q.v.) values for the variable.
     *Note Variables::.

GNU
     GNU is a recursive acronym for GNU's Not Unix, and it refers to a
     Unix-compatible operating system which is free software (q.v.).
     *Note Manifesto::.  GNU is normally used with Linux as the kernel
     since Linux works better than the GNU kernel.  For more
     information, see the GNU website (http://www.gnu.org/).

Graphic Character
     Graphic characters are those assigned pictorial images rather than
     just names.  All the non-Meta (q.v.) characters except for the
     Control (q.v.) characters are graphic characters.  These include
     letters, digits, punctuation, and spaces; they do not include
     <RET> or <ESC>.  In Emacs, typing a graphic character inserts that
     character (in ordinary editing modes).  *Note Inserting Text::.

Graphical Display
     A graphical display is one that can display images and multiple
     fonts.  Usually it also has a window system (q.v.).

Highlighting
     Highlighting text means displaying it with a different foreground
     and/or background color to make it stand out from the rest of the
     text in the buffer.

     Emacs uses highlighting in several ways.  It highlights the region
     whenever it is active (*note Mark::).  Incremental search also
     highlights matches (*note Incremental Search::).  See also `font
     lock.'

Hardcopy
     Hardcopy means printed output.  Emacs has various commands for
     printing the contents of Emacs buffers.  *Note Printing::.

<HELP>
     <HELP> is the Emacs name for `C-h' or <F1>.  You can type <HELP>
     at any time to ask what options you have, or to ask what any
     command does.  *Note Help::.

Help Echo
     Help echo is a short message displayed in the echo area (q.v.) when
     the mouse pointer is located on portions of display that require
     some explanations.  Emacs displays help echo for menu items, parts
     of the mode line, tool-bar buttons, etc.  On graphics displays,
     the messages can be displayed as tooltips (q.v.).  *Note
     Tooltips::.

Home Directory
     Your home directory contains your personal files.  On a multi-user
     GNU or Unix system, each user has his or her own home directory.
     When you start a new login session, your home directory is the
     default directory in which to start.  A standard shorthand for
     your home directory is `~'.  Similarly, `~USER' represents the
     home directory of some other user.

Hook
     A hook is a list of functions to be called on specific occasions,
     such as saving a buffer in a file, major mode activation, etc.  By
     customizing the various hooks, you can modify Emacs's behavior
     without changing any of its code.  *Note Hooks::.

Hyper
     Hyper is the name of a modifier bit that a keyboard input
     character may have.  To make a character Hyper, type it while
     holding down the <HYPER> key.  Such characters are given names
     that start with `Hyper-' (usually written `H-' for short).  *Note
     User Input::.

Iff
     "Iff" means "if and only if."  This terminology comes from
     mathematics.  Try to avoid using this term in documentation, since
     many are unfamiliar with it and mistake it for a typo.

Inbox
     An inbox is a file in which mail is delivered by the operating
     system.  Rmail transfers mail from inboxes to Rmail files (q.v.)
     in which the mail is then stored permanently or until explicitly
     deleted.  *Note Rmail Inbox::.

Incremental Search
     Emacs provides an incremental search facility, whereby Emacs begins
     searching for a string as soon as you type the first character.
     As you type more characters, it refines the search.  *Note
     Incremental Search::.

Indentation
     Indentation means blank space at the beginning of a line.  Most
     programming languages have conventions for using indentation to
     illuminate the structure of the program, and Emacs has special
     commands to adjust indentation.  *Note Indentation::.

Indirect Buffer
     An indirect buffer is a buffer that shares the text of another
     buffer, called its base buffer (q.v.).  *Note Indirect Buffers::.

Info
     Info is the hypertext format used by the GNU project for writing
     documentation.

Input Event
     An input event represents, within Emacs, one action taken by the
     user on the terminal.  Input events include typing characters,
     typing function keys, pressing or releasing mouse buttons, and
     switching between Emacs frames.  *Note User Input::.

Input Method
     An input method is a system for entering non-ASCII text characters
     by typing sequences of ASCII characters (q.v.).  *Note Input
     Methods::.

Insertion
     Insertion means adding text into the buffer, either from the
     keyboard or from some other place in Emacs.

Interlocking
     Interlocking is a feature for warning when you start to alter a
     file that someone else is already editing.  *Note Interlocking:
     Interlocking.

Isearch
     See `incremental search.'

Justification
     Justification means adding extra spaces within lines of text in
     order to adjust the position of the text edges.  *Note Format
     Justification::.

Key Binding
     See `binding.'

Keyboard Macro
     Keyboard macros are a way of defining new Emacs commands from
     sequences of existing ones, with no need to write a Lisp program.
     You can use a macro to record a sequence of commands, then play
     them back as many times as you like.  *Note Keyboard Macros::.

Keyboard Shortcut
     A keyboard shortcut is a key sequence (q.v.) which invokes a
     command.  What some programs call "assigning a keyboard shortcut,"
     Emacs calls "binding a key sequence."  See `binding.'

Key Sequence
     A key sequence (key, for short) is a sequence of input events
     (q.v.)  that are meaningful as a single unit.  If the key sequence
     is enough to specify one action, it is a complete key (q.v.); if
     it is not enough, it is a prefix key (q.v.).  *Note Keys::.

Keymap
     The keymap is the data structure that records the bindings (q.v.)
     of key sequences to the commands that they run.  For example, the
     global keymap binds the character `C-n' to the command function
     `next-line'.  *Note Keymaps::.

Keyboard Translation Table
     The keyboard translation table is an array that translates the
     character codes that come from the terminal into the character
     codes that make up key sequences.

Kill Ring
     The kill ring is where all text you have killed recently is saved.
     You can reinsert any of the killed text still in the ring; this is
     called yanking (q.v.).  *Note Yanking::.

Killing
     Killing means erasing text and saving it on the kill ring so it
     can be yanked (q.v.) later.  Some other systems call this
     "cutting."  Most Emacs commands that erase text perform killing,
     as opposed to deletion (q.v.).  *Note Killing::.

Killing a Job
     Killing a job (such as, an invocation of Emacs) means making it
     cease to exist.  Any data within it, if not saved in a file, is
     lost.  *Note Exiting::.

Language Environment
     Your choice of language environment specifies defaults for the
     input method (q.v.) and coding system (q.v.).  *Note Language
     Environments::.  These defaults are relevant if you edit non-ASCII
     text (*note International::).

Line Wrapping
     See `filling.'

Lisp
     Lisp is a programming language.  Most of Emacs is written in a
     dialect of Lisp, called Emacs Lisp, which is extended with special
     features that make it especially suitable for text editing tasks.

List
     A list is, approximately, a text string beginning with an open
     parenthesis and ending with the matching close parenthesis.  In C
     mode and other non-Lisp modes, groupings surrounded by other kinds
     of matched delimiters appropriate to the language, such as braces,
     are also considered lists.  Emacs has special commands for many
     operations on lists.  *Note Moving by Parens::.

Local
     Local means "in effect only in a particular context"; the relevant
     kind of context is a particular function execution, a particular
     buffer, or a particular major mode.  It is the opposite of `global'
     (q.v.).  Specific uses of `local' in Emacs terminology appear
     below.

Local Abbrev
     A local abbrev definition is effective only if a particular major
     mode is selected.  In that major mode, it overrides any global
     definition for the same abbrev.  *Note Abbrevs::.

Local Keymap
     A local keymap is used in a particular major mode; the key bindings
     (q.v.) in the current local keymap override global bindings of the
     same key sequences.  *Note Keymaps::.

Local Variable
     A local value of a variable (q.v.) applies to only one buffer.
     *Note Locals::.

`M-'
     `M-' in the name of a character is an abbreviation for <META>, one
     of the modifier keys that can accompany any character.  *Note M-:
     User Input.

`M-C-'
     `M-C-' in the name of a character is an abbreviation for
     Control-Meta; it means the same thing as ``C-M-'' (q.v.).

`M-x'
     `M-x' is the key sequence that is used to call an Emacs command by
     name.  This is how you run commands that are not bound to key
     sequences.  *Note M-x: M-x.

Mail
     Mail means messages sent from one user to another through the
     computer system, to be read at the recipient's convenience.  Emacs
     has commands for composing and sending mail, and for reading and
     editing the mail you have received.  *Note Sending Mail::.  *Note
     Rmail::, for one way to read mail with Emacs.

Mail Composition Method
     A mail composition method is a program runnable within Emacs for
     editing and sending a mail message.  Emacs lets you select from
     several alternative mail composition methods.  *Note Mail
     Methods::.

Major Mode
     The Emacs major modes are a mutually exclusive set of options,
     each of which configures Emacs for editing a certain sort of text.
     Ideally, each programming language has its own major mode.  *Note
     Major Modes::.

Margin
     The space between the usable part of a window (including the
     fringe) and the window edge.

Mark
     The mark points to a position in the text.  It specifies one end
     of the region (q.v.), point being the other end.  Many commands
     operate on all the text from point to the mark.  Each buffer has
     its own mark.  *Note Mark::.

Mark Ring
     The mark ring is used to hold several recent previous locations of
     the mark, just in case you want to move back to them.  Each buffer
     has its own mark ring; in addition, there is a single global mark
     ring (q.v.).  *Note Mark Ring::.

Menu Bar
     The menu bar is a line at the top of an Emacs frame.  It contains
     words you can click on with the mouse to bring up menus, or you
     can use a keyboard interface to navigate it.  *Note Menu Bars::.

Message
     See `mail.'

Meta
     Meta is the name of a modifier bit which you can use in a command
     character.  To enter a meta character, you hold down the <META>
     key while typing the character.  We refer to such characters with
     names that start with `Meta-' (usually written `M-' for short).
     For example, `M-<' is typed by holding down <META> and at the same
     time typing `<' (which itself is done, on most terminals, by
     holding down <SHIFT> and typing `,').  *Note Meta: User Input.

     On some terminals, the <META> key is actually labeled <ALT> or
     <EDIT>.

Meta Character
     A Meta character is one whose character code includes the Meta bit.

Minibuffer
     The minibuffer is the window that appears when necessary inside the
     echo area (q.v.), used for reading arguments to commands.  *Note
     Minibuffer::.

Minibuffer History
     The minibuffer history records the text you have specified in the
     past for minibuffer arguments, so you can conveniently use the
     same text again.  *Note Minibuffer History::.

Minor Mode
     A minor mode is an optional feature of Emacs which can be switched
     on or off independently of all other features.  Each minor mode
     has a command to turn it on or off.  Some minor modes are global
     (q.v.), and some are local (q.v.).  *Note Minor Modes::.

Minor Mode Keymap
     A minor mode keymap is a keymap that belongs to a minor mode and is
     active when that mode is enabled.  Minor mode keymaps take
     precedence over the buffer's local keymap, just as the local
     keymap takes precedence over the global keymap.  *Note Keymaps::.

Mode Line
     The mode line is the line at the bottom of each window (q.v.),
     giving status information on the buffer displayed in that window.
     *Note Mode Line::.

Modified Buffer
     A buffer (q.v.) is modified if its text has been changed since the
     last time the buffer was saved (or since it was created, if it has
     never been saved).  *Note Saving::.

Moving Text
     Moving text means erasing it from one place and inserting it in
     another.  The usual way to move text is by killing (q.v.) it and
     then yanking (q.v.) it.  *Note Killing::.

MULE
     MULE refers to the Emacs features for editing multilingual
     non-ASCII text using multibyte characters (q.v.).  *Note
     International::.

Multibyte Character
     A multibyte character is a character that takes up several bytes
     in a buffer.  Emacs uses multibyte characters to represent
     non-ASCII text, since the number of non-ASCII characters is much
     more than 256.  *Note International Characters: International
     Chars.

Named Mark
     A named mark is a register (q.v.) in its role of recording a
     location in text so that you can move point to that location.
     *Note Registers::.

Narrowing
     Narrowing means creating a restriction (q.v.) that limits editing
     in the current buffer to only a part of the text.  Text outside
     that part is inaccessible for editing (or viewing) until the
     boundaries are widened again, but it is still there, and saving
     the file saves it all.  *Note Narrowing::.

Newline
     Control-J characters in the buffer terminate lines of text and are
     therefore also called newlines.  See `End of Line.'

`nil'
     `nil' is a value usually interpreted as a logical "false."  Its
     opposite is `t', interpreted as "true."

Numeric Argument
     A numeric argument is a number, specified before a command, to
     change the effect of the command.  Often the numeric argument
     serves as a repeat count.  *Note Arguments::.

Overwrite Mode
     Overwrite mode is a minor mode.  When it is enabled, ordinary text
     characters replace the existing text after point rather than
     pushing it to the right.  *Note Minor Modes::.

Page
     A page is a unit of text, delimited by formfeed characters (ASCII
     control-L, code 014) coming at the beginning of a line.  Some Emacs
     commands are provided for moving over and operating on pages.
     *Note Pages::.

Paragraph
     Paragraphs are the medium-size unit of human-language text.  There
     are special Emacs commands for moving over and operating on
     paragraphs.  *Note Paragraphs::.

Parsing
     We say that certain Emacs commands parse words or expressions in
     the text being edited.  Really, all they know how to do is find
     the other end of a word or expression.  *Note Syntax::.

Point
     Point is the place in the buffer at which insertion and deletion
     occur.  Point is considered to be between two characters, not at
     one character.  The terminal's cursor (q.v.) indicates the
     location of point.  *Note Point::.

Prefix Argument
     See `numeric argument.'

Prefix Key
     A prefix key is a key sequence (q.v.) whose sole function is to
     introduce a set of longer key sequences.  `C-x' is an example of
     prefix key; any two-character sequence starting with `C-x' is
     therefore a legitimate key sequence.  *Note Keys::.

Primary Rmail File
     Your primary Rmail file is the file named `RMAIL' in your home
     directory.  That's where Rmail stores your incoming mail, unless
     you specify a different file name.  *Note Rmail::.

Primary Selection
     The primary selection is one particular X selection (q.v.); it is
     the selection that most X applications use for transferring text
     to and from other applications.

     The Emacs kill commands set the primary selection and the yank
     command uses the primary selection when appropriate.  *Note
     Killing::.

Prompt
     A prompt is text used to ask you for input.  Displaying a prompt
     is called prompting.  Emacs prompts always appear in the echo area
     (q.v.).  One kind of prompting happens when the minibuffer is used
     to read an argument (*note Minibuffer::); the echoing that happens
     when you pause in the middle of typing a multi-character key
     sequence is also a kind of prompting (*note Echo Area::).

Query-Replace
     Query-replace is an interactive string replacement feature
     provided by Emacs.  *Note Query Replace::.

Quitting
     Quitting means canceling a partially typed command or a running
     command, using `C-g' (or `C-<BREAK>' on MS-DOS).  *Note Quitting::.

Quoting
     Quoting means depriving a character of its usual special
     significance.  The most common kind of quoting in Emacs is with
     `C-q'.  What constitutes special significance depends on the
     context and on convention.  For example, an "ordinary" character
     as an Emacs command inserts itself; so in this context, a special
     character is any character that does not normally insert itself
     (such as <DEL>, for example), and quoting it makes it insert
     itself as if it were not special.  Not all contexts allow quoting.
     *Note Quoting: Inserting Text.

Quoting File Names
     Quoting a file name turns off the special significance of
     constructs such as `$', `~' and `:'.  *Note Quoted File Names::.

Read-Only Buffer
     A read-only buffer is one whose text you are not allowed to change.
     Normally Emacs makes buffers read-only when they contain text which
     has a special significance to Emacs; for example, Dired buffers.
     Visiting a file that is write-protected also makes a read-only
     buffer.  *Note Buffers::.

Rectangle
     A rectangle consists of the text in a given range of columns on a
     given range of lines.  Normally you specify a rectangle by putting
     point at one corner and putting the mark at the diagonally
     opposite corner.  *Note Rectangles::.

Recursive Editing Level
     A recursive editing level is a state in which part of the
     execution of a command involves asking you to edit some text.
     This text may or may not be the same as the text to which the
     command was applied.  The mode line indicates recursive editing
     levels with square brackets (`[' and `]').  *Note Recursive Edit::.

Redisplay
     Redisplay is the process of correcting the image on the screen to
     correspond to changes that have been made in the text being edited.
     *Note Redisplay: Screen.

Regexp
     See `regular expression.'

Region
     The region is the text between point (q.v.) and the mark (q.v.).
     Many commands operate on the text of the region.  *Note Region:
     Mark.

Register
     Registers are named slots in which text, buffer positions, or
     rectangles can be saved for later use.  *Note Registers::.  A
     related Emacs feature is `bookmarks' (q.v.).

Regular Expression
     A regular expression is a pattern that can match various text
     strings; for example, `a[0-9]+' matches `a' followed by one or more
     digits.  *Note Regexps::.

Remote File
     A remote file is a file that is stored on a system other than your
     own.  Emacs can access files on other computers provided that they
     are connected to the same network as your machine, and (obviously)
     that you have a supported method to gain access to those files.
     *Note Remote Files::.

Repeat Count
     See `numeric argument.'

Replacement
     See `global substitution.'

Restriction
     A buffer's restriction is the amount of text, at the beginning or
     the end of the buffer, that is temporarily inaccessible.  Giving a
     buffer a nonzero amount of restriction is called narrowing (q.v.);
     removing a restriction is called widening (q.v.).  *Note
     Narrowing::.

<RET>
     <RET> is a character that in Emacs runs the command to insert a
     newline into the text.  It is also used to terminate most arguments
     read in the minibuffer (q.v.).  *Note Return: User Input.

Reverting
     Reverting means returning to the original state.  Emacs lets you
     revert a buffer by re-reading its file from disk.  *Note
     Reverting::.

Rmail File
     An Rmail file is a file containing text in the format used by
     Rmail for storing mail.  *Note Rmail::.

Saving
     Saving a buffer means copying its text into the file that was
     visited (q.v.) in that buffer.  This is the way text in files
     actually gets changed by your Emacs editing.  *Note Saving::.

Scroll Bar
     A scroll bar is a tall thin hollow box that appears at the side of
     a window.  You can use mouse commands in the scroll bar to scroll
     the window.  The scroll bar feature is supported only under
     windowing systems.  *Note Scroll Bars::.

Scrolling
     Scrolling means shifting the text in the Emacs window so as to see
     a different part of the buffer.  *Note Scrolling::.

Searching
     Searching means moving point to the next occurrence of a specified
     string or the next match for a specified regular expression.
     *Note Search::.

Search Path
     A search path is a list of directory names, to be used for
     searching for files for certain purposes.  For example, the
     variable `load-path' holds a search path for finding Lisp library
     files.  *Note Lisp Libraries::.

Secondary Selection
     The secondary selection is one particular X selection (q.v.); some
     X applications can use it for transferring text to and from other
     applications.  Emacs has special mouse commands for transferring
     text using the secondary selection.  *Note Secondary Selection::.

Selected Frame
     The selected frame is the one your input currently operates on.
     *Note Frames::.

Selected Window
     The selected window is the one your input currently operates on.
     *Note Basic Window::.

Selecting a Buffer
     Selecting a buffer means making it the current (q.v.) buffer.
     *Note Select Buffer::.

Selection
     Windowing systems allow an application program to specify
     selections whose values are text.  A program can also read the
     selections that other programs have set up.  This is the principal
     way of transferring text between window applications.  Emacs has
     commands to work with the primary (q.v.) selection and the
     secondary (q.v.)  selection, and also with the clipboard (q.v.).

Self-Documentation
     Self-documentation is the feature of Emacs that can tell you what
     any command does, or give you a list of all commands related to a
     topic you specify.  You ask for self-documentation with the help
     character, `C-h'.  *Note Help::.

Self-Inserting Character
     A character is self-inserting if typing that character inserts that
     character in the buffer.  Ordinary printing and whitespace
     characters are self-inserting in Emacs, except in certain special
     major modes.

Sentences
     Emacs has commands for moving by or killing by sentences.  *Note
     Sentences::.

Sexp
     A sexp (short for "s-expression") is the basic syntactic unit of
     Lisp in its textual form: either a list, or Lisp atom.  Sexps are
     also the balanced expressions (q.v.) of the Lisp language; this is
     why the commands for editing balanced expressions have `sexp' in
     their name.  *Note Sexps: Expressions.

Simultaneous Editing
     Simultaneous editing means two users modifying the same file at
     once.  Simultaneous editing, if not detected, can cause one user
     to lose his or her work.  Emacs detects all cases of simultaneous
     editing, and warns one of the users to investigate.  *Note
     Interlocking: Interlocking.

<SPC>
     <SPC> is the space character, which you enter by pressing the
     space bar.

Speedbar
     The speedbar is a special tall frame that provides fast access to
     Emacs buffers, functions within those buffers, Info nodes, and
     other interesting parts of text within Emacs.  *Note Speedbar::.

Spell Checking
     Spell checking means checking correctness of the written form of
     each one of the words in a text.  Emacs can use various external
     spelling-checker programs to check the spelling of parts of a
     buffer via a convenient user interface.  *Note Spelling::.

String
     A string is a kind of Lisp data object which contains a sequence of
     characters.  Many Emacs variables are intended to have strings as
     values.  The Lisp syntax for a string consists of the characters
     in the string with a `"' before and another `"' after.  A `"' that
     is part of the string must be written as `\"' and a `\' that is
     part of the string must be written as `\\'.  All other characters,
     including newline, can be included just by writing them inside the
     string; however, backslash sequences as in C, such as `\n' for
     newline or `\241' using an octal character code, are allowed as
     well.

String Substitution
     See `global substitution.'

Syntax Highlighting
     See `font lock.'

Syntax Table
     The syntax table tells Emacs which characters are part of a word,
     which characters balance each other like parentheses, etc.  *Note
     Syntax::.

Super
     Super is the name of a modifier bit that a keyboard input
     character may have.  To make a character Super, type it while
     holding down the <SUPER> key.  Such characters are given names
     that start with `Super-' (usually written `s-' for short).  *Note
     User Input::.

Suspending
     Suspending Emacs means stopping it temporarily and returning
     control to its parent process, which is usually a shell.  Unlike
     killing a job (q.v.), you can later resume the suspended Emacs job
     without losing your buffers, unsaved edits, undo history, etc.
     *Note Exiting::.

<TAB>
     <TAB> is the tab character.  In Emacs it is typically used for
     indentation or completion.

Tags Table
     A tags table is a file that serves as an index to the function
     definitions in one or more other files.  *Note Tags::.

Termscript File
     A termscript file contains a record of all characters sent by
     Emacs to the terminal.  It is used for tracking down bugs in Emacs
     redisplay.  Emacs does not make a termscript file unless you tell
     it to.  *Note Bugs::.

Text
     `Text' has two meanings (*note Text::):

        * Data consisting of a sequence of characters, as opposed to
          binary numbers, executable programs, and the like.  The basic
          contents of an Emacs buffer (aside from the text properties,
          q.v.) are always text in this sense.

        * Data consisting of written human language (as opposed to
          programs), or following the stylistic conventions of human
          language.

Text-only Terminal
     A text-only terminal is a display that is limited to displaying
     text in character units.  Such a terminal cannot control
     individual pixels it displays.  Emacs supports a subset of display
     features on text-only terminals.

Text Properties
     Text properties are annotations recorded for particular characters
     in the buffer.  Images in the buffer are recorded as text
     properties; they also specify formatting information.  *Note
     Editing Format Info::.

Tool Bar
     The tool bar is a line (sometimes multiple lines) of icons at the
     top of an Emacs frame.  Clicking on one of these icons executes a
     command.  You can think of this as a graphical relative of the
     menu bar (q.v.).  *Note Tool Bars::.

Tooltips
     Tooltips are small windows displaying a help echo (q.v.) text,
     which explains parts of the display, lists useful options
     available via mouse clicks, etc.  *Note Tooltips::.

Top Level
     Top level is the normal state of Emacs, in which you are editing
     the text of the file you have visited.  You are at top level
     whenever you are not in a recursive editing level (q.v.) or the
     minibuffer (q.v.), and not in the middle of a command.  You can
     get back to top level by aborting (q.v.) and quitting (q.v.).
     *Note Quitting::.

Transposition
     Transposing two units of text means putting each one into the place
     formerly occupied by the other.  There are Emacs commands to
     transpose two adjacent characters, words, balanced expressions
     (q.v.) or lines (*note Transpose::).

Truncation
     Truncating text lines in the display means leaving out any text on
     a line that does not fit within the right margin of the window
     displaying it.  See also `continuation line.'  *Note Truncation:
     Continuation Lines.

TTY
     See `text-only terminal.'

Undoing
     Undoing means making your previous editing go in reverse, bringing
     back the text that existed earlier in the editing session.  *Note
     Undo::.

Unix
     Unix is a class of multi-user computer operating systems with a
     long history.  There are several implementations today.  The GNU
     project (q.v.) aims to develop a complete Unix-like operating
     system that is free software (q.v.).

User Option
     A user option is a face (q.v.) or a variable (q.v.) that exists so
     that you can customize Emacs by setting it to a new value.  *Note
     Easy Customization::.

Variable
     A variable is an object in Lisp that can store an arbitrary value.
     Emacs uses some variables for internal purposes, and has others
     (known as `user options'; q.v.) just so that you can set their
     values to control the behavior of Emacs.  The variables used in
     Emacs that you are likely to be interested in are listed in the
     Variables Index in this manual (*note Variable Index::).  *Note
     Variables::, for information on variables.

Version Control
     Version control systems keep track of multiple versions of a
     source file.  They provide a more powerful alternative to keeping
     backup files (q.v.).  *Note Version Control::.

Visiting
     Visiting a file means loading its contents into a buffer (q.v.)
     where they can be edited.  *Note Visiting::.

Whitespace
     Whitespace is any run of consecutive formatting characters (space,
     tab, newline, and backspace).

Widening
     Widening is removing any restriction (q.v.) on the current buffer;
     it is the opposite of narrowing (q.v.).  *Note Narrowing::.

Window
     Emacs divides a frame (q.v.) into one or more windows, each of
     which can display the contents of one buffer (q.v.) at any time.
     *Note Screen::, for basic information on how Emacs uses the screen.
     *Note Windows::, for commands to control the use of windows.  Some
     other editors use the term "window" for what we call a `frame'
     (q.v.) in Emacs.

Window System
     A window system is software that operates on a graphical display
     (q.v.), to subdivide the screen so that multiple applications can
     have their] own windows at the same time.  All modern operating
     systems include a window system.

Word Abbrev
     See `abbrev.'

Word Search
     Word search is searching for a sequence of words, considering the
     punctuation between them as insignificant.  *Note Word Search::.

WYSIWYG
     WYSIWYG stands for "What you see is what you get."  Emacs generally
     provides WYSIWYG editing for files of characters; in Enriched mode
     (*note Formatted Text::), it provides WYSIWYG editing for files
     that include text formatting information.

Yanking
     Yanking means reinserting text previously killed (q.v.).  It can be
     used to undo a mistaken kill, or for copying or moving text.  Some
     other systems call this "pasting."  *Note Yanking::.


File: emacs,  Node: Acknowledgments,  Next: Screen,  Prev: Concept Index,  Up: Top

Acknowledgments
***************

Many people have contributed code included in the Free Software
Foundation's distribution of GNU Emacs.  To show our appreciation for
their public spirit, we list here in alphabetical order those who have
written substantial portions.  Others too numerous to mention have
reported and fixed bugs, and added features to many parts of Emacs.  We
thank them for their generosity as well.

   This list is intended to mention every contributor of a major
package or feature we currently distribute; if you know of someone we
have omitted, please report that as a manual bug.  More comprehensive
information is available in the `ChangeLog' files, summarized in the
file `etc/AUTHORS' in the distribution.

   * Per Abrahamsen wrote the customization facilities, as well as
     `double.el', for typing accented characters not normally available
     from the keyboard; `xt-mouse.el', which allows mouse commands
     through Xterm; `gnus-cus.el', which implements customization
     commands for Gnus; `gnus-cite.el', a citation-parsing facility for
     news articles); `gnus-score.el', scoring for Gnus; `cpp.el', which
     hides or highlights parts of C programs according to preprocessor
     conditionals; and the widget library files `wid-browse.el',
     `wid-edit.el', `widget.el'.  He also co-wrote `gnus-soup.el'.

   * Tomas Abrahamsson wrote `artist.el', a package for producing ASCII
     art with a mouse or with keyboard keys.

   * Jay K. Adams wrote `jka-compr.el' and `jka-cmpr-hook.el',
     providing automatic decompression and recompression for compressed
     files.

   * Michael Albinus wrote `dbus.el', a package that implements the
     D-Bus message bus protocol; `zeroconf.el', a mode for browsing
     Avahi services; and `xesam.el', a Xesam-based search engine
     interface.  He and Kai Grossjohann wrote the Tramp package, which
     provides transparent remote file editing using rcp, ssh, ftp, and
     other network protocols.  He and Daniel Pittman wrote
     `tramp-cache.el'.

   * Ralf Angeli wrote `scroll-lock.el', a minor mode which keeps the
     point vertically fixed by scrolling the window when moving up and
     down in the buffer.

   * Joe Arceneaux wrote the original text property implementation, and
     implemented support for X11.

   * Miles Bader wrote `image-file.el', support code for visiting image
     files; `minibuf-eldef.el', a minor mode that hides the minibuffer
     default value when appropriate; `rfn-eshadow.el', shadowing of
     `read-file-name' input; `mb-depth.el', display of minibuffer
     depth; `button.el', the library that implements clickable buttons;
     `face-remap.el', a package for changing the default face in
     individual buffers; and `macroexp.el' for macro-expansion.

   * David Bakhash wrote `strokes.el', a mode for controlling Emacs by
     moving the mouse in particular patterns.

   * Eli Barzilay wrote `calculator.el', a desktop calculator for Emacs.

   * Steven L. Baur wrote `footnote.el' which lets you include
     footnotes in email messages; and `gnus-audio.el' and `earcon.el',
     which provide sound effects for Gnus.  He also wrote
     `gnus-setup.el'.

   * Alexander L. Belikoff, Sergey Berezin, Sacha Chua, David Edmondson,
     Noah Friedman, Andreas Fuchs, Mario Lang, Ben Mesander, Lawrence
     Mitchell, Gergely Nagy, Michael Olson, Per Persson, Jorgen
     Schaefer, Alex Schroeder, and Tom Tromey wrote ERC, an advanced
     Internet Relay Chat client (for more information, see the file
     `CREDITS' in the ERC distribution).

   * Scott Bender, Michael Brouwer, Christophe de Dinechin, Carl Edman,
     Christian Limpach and Adrian Robert developed and maintained the
     NeXTstep port of Emacs.

   * Anna M. Bigatti wrote `cal-html.el', which produces HTML calendars.

   * Ray Blaak and Simon South wrote `delphi.el', a mode for editing
     Delphi (Object Pascal) source code.

   * Martin Blais, Stefan Merten, and David Goodger wrote `rst.el', a
     mode for editing reStructuredText documents.

   * Jim Blandy wrote Emacs 19's input system, brought its
     configuration and build process up to the GNU coding standards,
     and contributed to the frame support and multi-face support.  Jim
     also wrote `tvi970.el', terminal support for the TeleVideo 970
     terminals; and co-wrote `wyse50.el' (q.v.).

   * Per Bothner wrote `term.el', a terminal emulator in an Emacs
     buffer.

   * Terrence M. Brannon wrote `landmark.el', a neural-network robot
     that learns landmarks.

   * Frank Bresz wrote `diff.el', a program to display `diff' output.

   * Peter Breton implemented `dirtrack.el', a library for tracking
     directory changes in shell buffers; `filecache.el', which records
     which directories your files are in; `locate.el', which interfaces
     to the `locate' command; `find-lisp.el', an Emacs Lisp emulation
     of the `find' program; `net-utils.el'; and the "generic mode"
     feature.

   * Emmanuel Briot wrote `xml.el', an XML parser for Emacs; and
     `ada-prj.el', editing of Ada mode project files, as well as
     co-authoring `ada-mode.el' and `ada-xref.el'.

   * Kevin Broadey wrote `foldout.el', providing folding extensions to
     Emacs's outline modes.

   * David M. Brown wrote `array.el', for editing arrays and other
     tabular data.

   * W/lodek Bzyl and Ryszard Kubiak wrote `ogonek.el', a package for
     changing the encoding of Polish characters.

   * Bill Carpenter provided `feedmail.el', a package for massaging
     outgoing mail messages and sending them through various popular
     mailers.

   * Per Cederqvist and Inge Wallin wrote `ewoc.el', an Emacs widget for
     manipulating object collections.  Per Cederqvist, Inge Wallin, and
     Thomas Bellman wrote `avl-tree.el', for balanced binary trees.

   * Hans Chalupsky wrote `advice.el', an overloading mechanism for
     Emacs Lisp functions; and `trace.el', a tracing facility for Emacs
     Lisp.

   * Chris Chase, Carsten Dominik, and J. D. Smith wrote IDLWAVE mode,
     for editing IDL and WAVE CL.

   * Bob Chassell wrote `texnfo-upd.el', `texinfo.el', and
     `makeinfo.el', modes and utilities for working with Texinfo files;
     and `page-ext.el', commands for extended page handling.

   * Jihyun Cho wrote `hanja-util.el' and `hangul.el', utilities for
     Korean Hanja.

   * Andrew Choi and Yamamoto Mitsuharu wrote the Carbon support, used
     prior to Emacs 23 for Mac OS.

   * Chong Yidong was the Emacs co-maintainer for Emacs 23.  He made
     many improvements to the Emacs display engine; and, together with
     Kai Grossjohann and Alex Schroeder, wrote `longlines.el', a minor
     mode for wrapping long lines.

   * James Clark wrote SGML mode, a mode for editing SGML documents; and
     nXML mode, a mode for editing XML documents.  He also contributed
     to Emacs's dumping procedures.

   * Mike Clarkson wrote `edt.el', an emulation of DEC's EDT editor.

   * Glynn Clements provided `gamegrid.el' and a couple of games that
     use it, Snake and Tetris.

   * Andrew Cohen wrote `spam-wash.el', to decode and clean email before
     it is analysed for spam.

   * Georges Brun-Cottan and Stefan Monnier wrote `easy-mmode.el', a
     package for easy definition of major and minor modes.

   * Andrew Csillag wrote M4 mode (`m4-mode.el').

   * Doug Cutting and Jamie Zawinski wrote `disass.el', a disassembler
     for compiled Emacs Lisp code.

   * Mathias Dahl wrote `image-dired.el', a package for viewing image
     files as "thumbnails."

   * Vivek Dasmohapatra wrote `htmlfontify.el', to convert a buffer or
     source tree to HTML.

   * Michael DeCorte wrote `emacs.csh', a C-shell script that starts a
     new Emacs job, or restarts a paused Emacs if one exists.

   * Gary Delp wrote `mailpost.el', an interface between RMAIL and the
     `/usr/uci/post' mailer.

   * Matthieu Devin wrote `delsel.el', a package to make newly-typed
     text replace the current selection.

   * Eric Ding wrote `goto-addr.el',

   * Jan Dja"rv added support for the GTK+ toolkit and X drag-and-drop.

   * Carsten Dominik wrote RefTeX, a package for setting up labels and
     cross-references in LaTeX documents; and co-wrote IDLWAVE mode
     (q.v.).  He was the main author of Org mode, for maintaining notes,
     todo lists, and project planning.  Thomas Baumann, Lennart Borgman,
     Baoqiu Cui, Daniel German, Bastien Guerry, Tassilo Horn, Philip
     Jackson, Tokuya Kameshima, Ross Patterson, Sebastian Rose, Eric
     Schulte, Andy Stewart, David O'Toole, John Wiegley, and Piotr
     Zielinski also wrote various Org mode components.

   * Scott Draves wrote `tq.el', help functions for maintaining
     transaction queues between Emacs and its subprocesses.

   * Benjamin Drieu wrote `pong.el', an implementation of the classical
     pong game.

   * Viktor Dukhovni wrote support for dumping under SunOS version 4.

   * John Eaton and Kurt Hornik wrote Octave mode.

   * Rolf Ebert co-wrote Ada mode.

   * Stephen Eglen wrote `mspools.el', which tells you which Procmail
     folders have mail waiting in them; and `iswitchb.el', a feature
     for incremental reading and completion of buffer names.

   * Torbjo"rn Einarsson wrote `f90.el', a mode for Fortran 90 files.

   * Tsugutomo Enami co-wrote the support for international character
     sets.

   * David Engster wrote `mairix.el' and `nnmairix.el', an interface to
     the Mairix indexing tool.

   * Hans Henrik Eriksen wrote `simula.el', a mode for editing SIMULA 87
     code.

   * Michael Ernst wrote `reposition.el', a command for recentering a
     function's source code and preceding comment on the screen.

   * Ata Etemadi wrote `cdl.el', functions for working with Common Data
     Language source code.

   * Frederick Farnbach implemented `morse.el', which converts text to
     Morse code.

   * Oscar Figueiredo wrote EUDC, the Emacs Unified Directory Client,
     which is an interface to directory servers via LDAP, CCSO PH/QI,
     or BBDB; and `ldap.el', the LDAP client interface.

   * Fred Fish wrote the support for dumping COFF executable files.

   * Karl Fogel wrote `bookmark.el', which implements named
     placeholders; `mail-hist.el', a history mechanism for outgoing
     mail messages; and `saveplace.el', for preserving point's location
     in files between editing sessions.

   * Gary Foster wrote `crisp.el', the emulation for CRiSP and Brief
     editors; and `scroll-all.el', a mode for scrolling several buffers
     together.

   * Noah Friedman wrote `rlogin.el', an interface to Rlogin,
     `type-break.el', which reminds you to take periodic breaks from
     typing, and `eldoc-mode', a mode to show the defined parameters or
     the doc string for the Lisp function near point.

   * Shigeru Fukaya wrote a testsuite for the byte-compiler.

   * Keith Gabryelski wrote `hexl.el', a mode for editing binary files.

   * Kevin Gallagher rewrote and enhanced the EDT emulation, and wrote
     `flow-ctrl.el', a package for coping with unsuppressible XON/XOFF
     flow control.

   * Kevin Gallo added multiple-frame support for Windows NT and wrote
     `w32-win.el', support functions for the MS-Windows window system.

   * Juan Leo'n Lahoz Garci'a wrote `wdired.el', a package for
     performing file operations by directly editing Dired buffers.

   * Howard Gayle wrote much of the C and Lisp code for display tables
     and case tables.  He also wrote `rot13.el', a command to display
     the plain-text form of a buffer encoded with the Caesar cipher;
     `vt100-led.el', a package for controlling the LEDs on
     VT100-compatible terminals; and much of the support for ISO-8859
     European character sets (which includes `iso-ascii.el',
     `iso-insert.el', `iso-swed.el', `iso-syntax.el', `iso-transl.el',
     and `swedish.el').

   * Stephen Gildea made the Emacs quick reference card, and made many
     contributions for `time-stamp.el', a package for maintaining
     last-change time stamps in files.

   * Julien Gilles wrote `gnus-ml.el', a mailing list minor mode for
     Gnus.

   * David Gillespie wrote the Common Lisp compatibility packages;
     `Calc', an advanced calculator and mathematical tool, since
     maintained and developed by Jay Belanger; `complete.el', a partial
     completion mechanism; and `edmacro.el', a package for editing
     keyboard macros.

   * Bob Glickstein wrote `sregex.el', a facility for writing regexps
     using a Lisp-like syntax.

   * Boris Goldowsky wrote `avoid.el', a package to keep the mouse
     cursor out of the way of the text cursor; `shadowfile.el', a
     package for keeping identical copies of files in more than one
     place; `format.el', a package for reading and writing files in
     various formats; `enriched.el', a package for saving text
     properties in files; `facemenu.el', a package for specifying
     faces; and `descr-text.el', describing text and character
     properties.

   * Michelangelo Grigni wrote `ffap.el' which visits a file, taking
     the file name from the buffer.

   * Odd Gripenstam wrote `dcl-mode.el' for editing DCL command files.

   * Michael Gschwind wrote `iso-cvt.el', a package to convert between
     the ISO 8859-1 character set and the notations for non-ASCII
     characters used by TeX and net tradition.

   * Bastien Guerry wrote `gnus-bookmark.el', bookmark support for Gnus;
     as well as contributing to Org mode (q.v.).

   * Henry Guillaume wrote `find-file.el', a package to visit files
     related to the currently visited file.

   * Doug Gwyn wrote the portable `alloca' implementation.

   * Ken'ichi Handa implemented most of the support for international
     character sets, and wrote most of the Emacs 23 font handling code.
     He also wrote `composite.el', which provides a minor mode that
     composes characters automatically when they are displayed;
     `isearch-x.el', a facility for searching non-ASCII text; and
     `ps-bdf.el', a BDF font support for printing non-ASCII text on a
     PostScript printer.  Together with Naoto Takahashi, he wrote
     `quail.el', an input facility for typing non-ASCII text from an
     ASCII keyboard.

   * Jesper Harder wrote `yenc.el', for decoding yenc encoded messages.

   * K. Shane Hartman wrote `chistory.el' and `echistory.el', packages
     for browsing command history lists; `electric.el' and `helper.el',
     which provide an alternative command loop and appropriate help
     facilities; `emacsbug.el', a package for reporting Emacs bugs;
     `picture.el', a mode for editing ASCII pictures; and `view.el', a
     package for perusing files and buffers without editing them.

   * John Heidemann wrote `mouse-copy.el' and `mouse-drag.el', which
     provide alternative mouse-based editing and scrolling features.

   * Jon K Hellan wrote `utf7.el', support for mail-safe transformation
     format of Unicode.

   * Markus Heritsch co-wrote Ada mode.

   * Karl Heuer wrote the original blessmail script, implemented the
     `intangible' text property, and rearranged the structure of the
     `Lisp_Object' type to allow for more data bits.

   * Manabu Higashida ported Emacs to MS-DOS.

   * Anders Holst wrote `hippie-exp.el', a versatile completion and
     expansion package.

   * Tassilo Horn wrote DocView mode, allowing viewing of PDF,
     PostScript and DVI documents.

   * Tom Houlder wrote `mantemp.el', which generates manual C++
     template instantiations.

   * Joakim Hove wrote `html2text.el', a html to plain text converter.

   * Denis Howe wrote `browse-url.el', a package for invoking a WWW
     browser to display a URL.

   * Lars Magne Ingebrigtsen did a major redesign of the Gnus
     news-reader and wrote many of its parts.  Several of these are now
     general components of Emacs: `dns.el' for Domain Name Service
     lookups; `format-spec.el' for formatting arbitrary format strings;
     `netrc.el' for parsing of `.netrc' files; and `time-date.el' for
     general date and time handling.  Components of Gnus have also been
     written by: Nagy Andras, David Blacka, Scott Byer, Kevin Greiner,
     Kai Grossjohann, Joe Hildebrand, Paul Jarc, Sascha Lu"decke, David
     Moore, Jim Radford, Benjamin Rutt, Raymond Scholz, Thomas Steffen,
     Reiner Steib, Didier Verna, Ilja Weis, Katsumi Yamaoka, Teodor
     Zlatanov, and others (*note Contributors: (gnus)Contributors.).

   * Andrew Innes contributed extensively to the MS-Windows support.

   * Seiichiro Inoue improved Emacs's XIM support.

   * Philip Jackson wrote `find-cmd.el', to build a `find' command-line.

   * Ulf Jasper wrote `icalendar.el', a package for converting Emacs
     diary entries to and from the iCalendar format; `newsticker.el',
     an RSS and Atom based Newsticker; and `bubbles.el', a puzzle game.

   * Kyle Jones wrote `life.el', a package to play Conway's "life" game.

   * Terry Jones wrote `shadow.el', a package for finding potential
     load-path problems when some Lisp file "shadows" another.

   * Simon Josefsson wrote `dns-mode.el', an editing mode for Domain
     Name System master files; `dig.el', a Domain Name System interface;
     `flow-fill.el', a package for interpreting RFC2646 formatted text
     in messages; `fringe.el', a package for customizing the fringe;
     `imap.el', an Emacs Lisp library for talking to IMAP servers;
     `password-cache.el', a password reader; `nnimap.el', the IMAP
     back-end for Gnus; `url-imap.el' for the URL library;
     `rfc2104.el', a hashed message authentication facility; the Gnus
     S/MIME and Sieve components; and `tls.el' and `starttls.el' for
     the Transport Layer Security protocol.

   * Arne J/orgensen wrote `latexenc.el', a package to automatically
     guess the correct coding system in LaTeX files.

   * Alexandre Julliard wrote `vc-git.el', support for the Git version
     control system.

   * Tomoji Kagatani implemented `smtpmail.el', used for sending out
     mail with SMTP.

   * Ivan Kanis wrote `vc-hg.el', support for the Mercurial version
     control system.

   * Henry Kautz wrote `bib-mode.el', a mode for maintaining
     bibliography databases compatible with `refer' (the `troff'
     version) and `lookbib', and `refbib.el', a package to convert
     those databases to the format used by the LaTeX text formatting
     package.

   * Taichi Kawabata added support for Devanagari script and the Indian
     languages, and wrote `ucs-normalize.el' for Unicode normalization.

   * Taro Kawagishi implented the MD4 Message Digest Algorithm in Lisp;
     and wrote `ntlm.el' and `sasl-ntlm.el' for NT LanManager
     authentication support.

   * Howard Kaye wrote `sort.el', commands to sort text in Emacs
     buffers.

   * Michael Kifer wrote `ediff', an interactive interface to the
     `diff', `patch', and `merge' programs; and Viper, the newest
     emulation for VI.

   * Richard King wrote the first version of `userlock.el' and
     `filelock.c', which provide simple support for multiple users
     editing the same file.  He also wrote the initial version of
     `uniquify.el', a facility to make buffer names unique by adding
     parts of the file's name to the buffer name.

   * Peter Kleiweg wrote `ps-mode.el', a mode for editing PostScript
     files and running a PostScript interpreter interactively from
     within Emacs.

   * Shuhei Kobayashi wrote `hex-util.el', for operating on hexadecimal
     strings; support for HMAC (Keyed-Hashing for Message
     Authentication); and a Lisp implementation of the SHA1 Secure Hash
     Algorithm.

   * Pavel Kobyakov wrote `flymake.el', a minor mode for performing
     on-the-fly syntax checking.

   * David M. Koppelman wrote `hi-lock.el', a minor mode for
     interactive automatic highlighting of parts of the buffer text.

   * Koseki Yoshinori wrote `iimage.el', a minor mode for displaying
     inline images.

   * Robert Krawitz wrote the original `xmenu.c', part of Emacs's pop-up
     menu support.

   * Sebastian Kremer wrote `dired-mode', with contributions by Lawrence
     R. Dodd.  He also wrote `ls-lisp.el', a Lisp emulation of the `ls'
     command for platforms which don't have `ls' as a standard program.

   * Ken Stevens wrote `ispell.el', a spell-checker interface.

   * David Ka*gedal wrote `tempo.el', providing support for easy
     insertion of boilerplate text and other common constructions.

   * Daniel LaLiberte wrote `edebug.el', a source-level debugger for
     Emacs Lisp; `cl-specs.el', specifications to help `edebug' debug
     code written using David Gillespie's Common Lisp support;
     `cust-print.el', a customizable package for printing lisp objects;
     and `isearch.el', Emacs's incremental search minor mode.  He also
     co-wrote `hideif.el' (q.v.).

   * Karl Landstrom and Daniel Colascione wrote `js.el', a mode for
     editing JavaScript.

   * Vinicius Jose Latorre wrote the Emacs printing facilities, as well
     as `ps-print' (with Jim Thompson, Jacques Duthen, and Kenichi
     Handa), a package for pretty-printing Emacs buffers to PostScript
     printers; `delim-col.el', a package to arrange text into columns;
     `ebnf2ps.el', a package that translates EBNF grammar to a syntactic
     chart that can be printed to a PostScript printer; and
     `whitespace.el', a package that detects and cleans up excess
     whitespace in a file.  The previous version of `whitespace.el',
     used prior to Emacs 23, was written by Rajesh Vaidheeswarran.

   * Frederic Lepied wrote `expand.el', which uses the abbrev mechanism
     for inserting programming constructs.

   * Peter Liljenberg wrote `elint.el', a Lint-style code checker for
     Emacs Lisp programs.

   * Lars Lindberg wrote `msb.el', which provides more flexible menus
     for buffer selection; co-wrote `imenu.el' (q.v.); and rewrote
     `dabbrev.el', originally written by Don Morrison.

   * Anders Lindgren wrote `autorevert.el', a package for automatically
     reverting files visited by Emacs that were changed on disk;
     `cwarn.el', a package to highlight suspicious C and C++
     constructs; and `follow.el', a minor mode to synchronize windows
     that show the same buffer.

   * Thomas Link wrote `filesets.el', a package for handling sets of
     files.

   * Juri Linkov wrote `misearch.el', extending isearch to multi-buffer
     searches; the code in `files-x.el' for handling file- and
     directory-local variables; and the `info-finder' feature that
     creates a virtual Info manual of package keywords.

   * Ka'roly Lo''rentey wrote the "multi-terminal" code, which allows
     Emacs to run on graphical and text-only terminals simultaneously.

   * Martin Lorentzon wrote `vc-annotate.el', support for version
     control annotation.

   * Dave Love wrote much of the code dealing with Unicode support and
     Latin-N unification.  He added support for many coding systems,
     including the various UTF-7 and UTF-16 coding systems.  He also
     wrote `autoarg-mode', a global minor mode whereby digit keys supply
     prefix arguments; `autoarg-kp-mode', which redefines the keypad
     numeric keys to digit arguments; `autoconf.el', a mode for editing
     Autoconf files; `cfengine.el', a mode for editing Cfengine files;
     `elide-head.el', a package for eliding boilerplate text from file
     headers; `hl-line.el', a minor mode for highlighting the line in
     the current window on which point is; `cap-words.el', a minor mode
     for motion in "CapitalizedWordIdentifiers"; `latin1-disp.el', a
     package that lets you display ISO 8859 characters on Latin-1
     terminals by setting up appropriate display tables; `python.el', a
     major mode for the Python programming language; `refill.el', a
     mode for automatic paragraph refilling, akin to typical word
     processors; `smiley.el', a facility for displaying smiley faces;
     `sym-comp.el', a library for performing mode-dependent symbol
     completion; `benchmark.el' for timing code execution; and
     `tool-bar.el', a mode to control the display of the Emacs tool bar.
     With Riccardo Murri he wrote `vc-bzr.el', support for the Bazaar
     version control system.

   * Eric Ludlam wrote the Speedbar package; `checkdoc.el', for checking
     doc strings in Emacs Lisp programs; `dframe.el', providing
     dedicated frame support modes; `ezimage.el', a generalized way to
     place images over text; `chart.el' for drawing bar charts etc; and
     the EIEIO (Enhanced Implementation of Emacs Interpreted Objects)
     package.  He was also the main author of the CEDET (Collection of
     Emacs Development Environment Tools) package.  Portions were also
     written by Jan Moringen, David Ponce, and Joakim Verona.

   * Alan Mackenzie wrote the integrated AWK support in CC Mode, and
     maintained CC Mode from Emacs 22 onwards.

   * Christopher J. Madsen wrote `decipher.el', a package for cracking
     simple substitution ciphers.

   * Neil M. Mager wrote `appt.el', functions to notify users of their
     appointments.  It finds appointments recorded in the diary files
     used by the `calendar' package.

   * Ken Manheimer wrote `allout.el', a mode for manipulating and
     formatting outlines, and `icomplete.el', which provides incremental
     completion feedback in the minibuffer.

   * Bill Mann wrote `perl-mode.el', a mode for editing Perl code.

   * Brian Marick and Daniel LaLiberte wrote `hideif.el', support for
     hiding selected code within C `#ifdef' clauses.

   * Simon Marshall wrote `regexp-opt.el', which generates a regular
     expression from a list of strings; and the fast-lock and lazy-lock
     font-lock support modes.  He also extended `comint.el' and
     `shell.el', originally written by Olin Shivers.

   * Bengt Martensson, Dirk Herrmann, Marc Shapiro, Mike Newton, Aaron
     Larson, and Stefan Schoef, wrote `bibtex.el', a mode for editing
     BibTeX bibliography files.

   * Charlie Martin wrote `autoinsert.el', which provides automatic
     mode-sensitive insertion of text into new files.

   * Yukihiro Matsumoto and Nobuyoshi Nakada wrote Ruby-mode.

   * Thomas May wrote `blackbox.el', a version of the traditional
     blackbox game.

   * Roland McGrath wrote `compile.el' (since updated by Daniel
     Pfeiffer), a package for running compilations in a buffer, and then
     visiting the locations reported in error messages; `etags.el', a
     package for jumping to function definitions and searching or
     replacing in all the files mentioned in a `TAGS' file;
     `find-dired.el', for using `dired' commands on output from the
     `find' program, with Sebastian Kremer; `grep.el' for running the
     `grep' command; `map-ynp.el', a general purpose boolean
     question-asker; `autoload.el', providing semi-automatic
     maintenance of autoload files.

   * Michael McNamara and Wilson Snyder wrote Verilog mode.

   * David Megginson wrote `derived.el', which allows one to define new
     major modes by inheriting key bindings and commands from existing
     major modes.

   * Will Mengarini wrote `repeat.el', a command to repeat the preceding
     command with its arguments.

   * Richard Mlynarik wrote `cl-indent.el', a package for indenting
     Common Lisp code; `ebuff-menu.el', an "electric" browser for
     buffer listings; `ehelp.el', bindings for browsing help screens;
     `rfc822.el', a parser for E-mail addresses in the RFC-822 format,
     used in mail messages and news articles; `terminal.el', a terminal
     emulator for Emacs subprocesses; and `yow.el', an essential
     utility.

   * Gerd Moellmann was the Emacs maintainer from the beginning of
     Emacs 21 development until the release of 21.1.  He wrote the new
     display engine used from Emacs 21 onwards, and the asynchronous
     timers facility.  He also wrote `ebrowse', the C++ browser;
     `jit-lock.el', the Just-In-Time font-lock support mode;
     `tooltip.el', a package for displaying tooltips; `authors.el', a
     package for maintaining the `AUTHORS' file; and `rx.el', a regular
     expression constructor.

   * Stefan Monnier was the Emacs co-maintainer for Emacs 23.  He added
     support for Arch and Subversion to VC, re-wrote much of the Emacs
     server to use the built-in networking primitives, and re-wrote the
     abbrev and minibuffer completion code for Emacs 23.  He also wrote
     `PCL-CVS', a directory-level front end to the CVS version control
     system; `reveal.el', a minor mode for automatically revealing
     invisible text; `smerge-mode.el', a minor mode for resolving
     `diff3' conflicts; `diff-mode.el', a mode for viewing and editing
     context diffs; `css-mode.el' for Cascading Style Sheets;
     `bibtex-style.el' for BibTeX Style files; and `mpc.el', a client
     for the "Music Player Daemon".

   * Morioka Tomohiko wrote several packages for MIME support in Gnus
     and elsewhere.

   * Takahashi Naoto co-wrote `quail.el' (q.v.), and wrote `robin.el',
     another input method.

   * Sen Nagata wrote `crm.el', a package for reading multiple strings
     with completion, and `rfc2368.el', support for `mailto:' URLs.

   * Erik Naggum wrote the time-conversion functions.  He also wrote
     `disp-table.el', a package for dealing with display tables;
     `mailheader.el', a package for parsing email headers; and
     `parse-time.el', a package for parsing time strings.

   * Thomas Neumann and Eric Raymond wrote `make-mode.el', a mode for
     editing makefiles.

   * Thien-Thi Nguyen and Dan Nicolaescu wrote `hideshow.el', a minor
     mode for selectively displaying blocks of text.

   * Dan Nicolaescu added support for running Emacs as a daemon.  He
     also wrote `romanian.el', support for editing Romanian text;
     `iris-ansi.el', support for running Emacs on SGI's `xwsh' and
     `winterm' terminal emulators; and `vc-dir.el', displaying the
     status of version-controlled directories.

   * Jurgen Nickelsen wrote `ws-mode.el', providing WordStar emulation.

   * Hrvoje Niksic wrote `savehist.el', for saving the minibuffer
     history between Emacs sessions.

   * Jeff Norden wrote `kermit.el', a package to help the Kermit dialup
     communications program run comfortably in an Emacs shell buffer.

   * Andrew Norman wrote `ange-ftp.el', providing transparent FTP
     support.

   * Edward O'Connor wrote `json.el', a file for parsing and generating
     JSON files.

   * Kentaro Ohkouchi created the Emacs icons used beginning with Emacs
     23.

   * Alexandre Oliva wrote `gnus-mlspl.el', a group params-based mail
     splitting mechanism.

   * Takaaki Ota wrote `table.el', a package for creating and editing
     embedded text-based tables.

   * Pieter E. J. Pareit wrote `mixal-mode.el', an editing mode for the
     MIX assembly language.

   * David Pearson wrote `quickurl.el', a simple method of inserting a
     URL into the current buffer based on text at point; `5x5.el', a
     game to fill all squares on the field.

   * Jeff Peck wrote `sun.el', key bindings for sunterm keys.

   * Damon Anton Permezel wrote `hanoi.el', an animated demonstration of
     the "Towers of Hanoi" puzzle.

   * William M. Perry wrote `mailcap.el' (with Lars Magne
     Ingebrigtsen), a MIME media types configuration facility;
     `mwheel.el', a package for supporting mouse wheels; co-wrote (with
     Dave Love) `socks.el', a Socks v5 client; and developed the URL
     package.

   * Per Persson wrote `gnus-vm.el', the VM interface for Gnus.

   * Jens Petersen wrote `find-func.el', which makes it easy to find
     the source code for an Emacs Lisp function or variable.

   * Daniel Pfeiffer wrote `conf-mode.el', a mode for editing
     configuration files; `copyright.el', a package for updating
     copyright notices in files; `executable.el', a package for
     executing interpreter scripts; `sh-script.el', a mode for editing
     shell scripts; `skeleton.el', implementing a concise language for
     writing statement skeletons; and `two-column.el', a minor mode for
     simultaneous two-column editing.

     Daniel also rewrote `apropos.el' (originally written by Joe Wells),
     for finding commands, functions, and variables matching a regular
     expression; and, together with Jim Blandy, co-authored `wyse50.el',
     support for Wyse 50 terminals.  He also co-wrote `compile.el'
     (q.v.) and `ada-stmt.el'.

   * Richard L. Pieri wrote `pop3.el', a Post Office Protocol (RFC
     1460) interface for Emacs.

   * Fred Pierresteguy and Paul Reilly made Emacs work with X Toolkit
     widgets.

   * Franc,ois Pinard, Greg McGary, and Bruno Haible wrote `po.el',
     support for PO translation files.

   * Christian Plaunt wrote `soundex.el', an implementation of the
     Soundex algorithm for comparing English words by their
     pronunciation.

   * David Ponce wrote `recentf.el', a package that puts a menu of
     recently visited files in the Emacs menu bar; `ruler-mode.el', a
     minor mode for displaying a ruler in the header line; and
     `tree-widget.el', a package to display hierarchical data
     structures.

   * Francesco A. Potorti wrote `cmacexp.el', providing a command which
     runs the C preprocessor on a region of a file and displays the
     results.  He also expanded and redesigned the `etags' program.

   * Michael D. Prange and Steven A. Wood wrote `fortran.el', a mode
     for editing Fortran code.

   * Ashwin Ram wrote `refer.el', commands to look up references in
     bibliography files by keyword.

   * Eric S. Raymond wrote `vc.el', an interface to the RCS and SCCS
     source code version control systems, with Paul Eggert; `gud.el', a
     package for running source-level debuggers like GDB and SDB in
     Emacs; `asm-mode.el', a mode for editing assembly language code;
     `AT386.el', terminal support package for IBM's AT keyboards;
     `cookie1.el', support for "fortune-cookie" programs like `yow.el'
     and `spook.el'; `finder.el', a package for finding Emacs Lisp
     packages by keyword and topic; `keyswap.el', code to swap the <BS>
     and <DEL> keys; `loadhist.el', functions for loading and unloading
     Emacs features; `lisp-mnt.el', functions for working with the
     special headers used in Emacs Lisp library files; and code to set
     and make use of the `load-history' lisp variable, which records
     the source file from which each lisp function loaded into Emacs
     came.

   * Edward M. Reingold wrote the extensive calendar and diary support,
     with contributions from Stewart Clamen (`cal-mayan.el'), Nachum
     Dershowitz (`cal-hebrew.el'), Paul Eggert (`cal-dst.el'), Steve
     Fisk (`cal-tex.el'), Michael Kifer (`cal-x.el'), Lara Rios
     (`cal-menu.el'), and Denis B. Roegel (`solar.el').  Andy Oram
     contributed to its documentation.  Reingold also contributed to
     `tex-mode.el', a mode for editing TeX files, as did William F.
     Schelter, Dick King, Stephen Gildea, Michael Prange, and Jacob
     Gore.

   * David Reitter wrote `mailclient.el' which can send mail via the
     system's designated mail client.

   * Alex Rezinsky wrote `which-func.el', a mode that shows the name of
     the current function in the mode line.

   * Rob Riepel wrote `tpu-edt.el' and its associated files, providing
     an emulation of the VMS TPU text editor emulating the VMS EDT
     editor, and `vt-control.el', providing some control functions for
     the DEC VT line of terminals.

   * Nick Roberts wrote `t-mouse.el', for mouse support in text
     terminals; and `gdb-ui.el', a graphical user interface to GDB.
     Together with Dmitry Dzhus, he wrote `gdb-mi.el', the successor to
     `gdb-ui.el'.

   * Danny Roozendaal implemented `handwrite.el', which converts text
     into "handwriting."

   * Markus Rost wrote `cus-test.el', a testing framework for customize.

   * Guillermo J. Rozas wrote `scheme.el', a mode for editing Scheme and
     DSSSL code, and `fakemail.c', an interface to the System V mailer.

   * Ivar Rummelhoff wrote `winner.el', which records recent window
     configurations so you can move back to them.

   * Jason Rumney ported the Emacs 21 display engine to MS-Windows, and
     has contributed extensively to the MS-Windows port of Emacs.

   * Wolfgang Rupprecht wrote Emacs 19's floating-point support
     (including `float-sup.el' and `floatfns.c'), and `sup-mouse.el',
     support for the Supdup mouse on lisp machines.

   * Kevin Ryde wrote `info-xref.el', a library for checking references
     in Info files.

   * James B. Salem and Brewster Kahle wrote `completion.el', providing
     dynamic word completion.

   * Masahiko Sato wrote `vip.el', an emulation of the VI editor.

   * Holger Schauer wrote `fortune.el', a package for using fortune in
     message signatures.

   * William Schelter wrote `telnet.el', support for `telnet' sessions
     within Emacs.

   * Ralph Schleicher wrote `battery.el', a package for displaying
     laptop computer battery status, and `info-look.el', a package for
     looking up Info documentation for symbols in the buffer.

   * Michael Schmidt and Tom Perrine wrote `modula2.el', a mode for
     editing Modula-2 code, based on work by Mick Jordan and Peter
     Robinson.

   * Ronald S. Schnell wrote `dunnet.el', a text adventure game.

   * Philippe Schnoebelen wrote `gomoku.el', a Go Moku game played
     against Emacs; and `mpuz.el', a multiplication puzzle.

   * Rainer Schoepf contributed to Alpha and OSF1 support.

   * Jan Schormann wrote `solitaire.el', an implementation of the
     Solitaire game.

   * Alex Schroeder wrote `ansi-color.el', a package for translating
     ANSI color escape sequences to Emacs faces; `sql.el', a package
     for interactively running an SQL interpreter in an Emacs buffer;
     `cus-theme.el', an interface for custom themes; `master.el', a
     package for making a buffer `master' over another; and
     `spam-stat.el', for statistical detection of junk email.  He also
     wrote parts of the IRC client ERC (q.v.).

   * Randal Schwartz wrote `pp.el', a pretty-printer for lisp objects.

   * Oliver Seidel wrote `todo-mode.el', a package for maintaining
     `TODO' list files.

   * Manuel Serrano wrote the Flyspell package, which does spell
     checking as you type.

   * Hovav Shacham wrote `windmove.el', a set of commands for selecting
     windows based on their geometrical position on the frame.

   * Stanislav Shalunov wrote `uce.el', for responding to unsolicited
     commercial email.

   * Richard Sharman wrote `hilit-chg.el', which uses colors to show
     recent editing changes.

   * Olin Shivers wrote `comint.el', a library for modes running
     interactive command-line-oriented subprocesses, and `shell.el', for
     running inferior shells (both since extended by Simon Marshall);
     `cmuscheme.el', for running inferior Scheme processes;
     `inf-lisp.el', for running inferior Lisp process.

   * Espen Skoglund wrote `pascal.el', a mode for editing Pascal code.

   * Rick Sladkey wrote `backquote.el', a lisp macro for creating
     mostly-constant data.

   * Lynn Slater wrote `help-macro.el', a macro for writing interactive
     help for key bindings.

   * Chris Smith wrote `icon.el', a mode for editing Icon code.

   * David Smith wrote `ielm.el', a mode for interacting with the Emacs
     Lisp interpreter as a subprocess.

   * Paul D. Smith wrote `snmp-mode.el'.

   * William Sommerfeld wrote `scribe.el', a mode for editing Scribe
     files, and `server.el', a package allowing programs to send files
     to an extant Emacs job to be edited.

   * Andre Spiegel made many contributions to the Emacs Version Control
     package, and in particular made it support multiple back ends.

   * Michael Staats wrote `pc-select.el', which rebinds keys for
     selecting regions to follow many other systems.

   * Richard Stallman invented Emacs.  He is the original author of GNU
     Emacs, and has been Emacs maintainer over several non-contiguous
     periods.  In addition to much of the "core" Emacs code, he has
     written `easymenu.el', a facility for defining Emacs menus;
     `image-mode.el', support for visiting image files; `menu-bar.el',
     the Emacs menu bar support code; `paren.el', a package to make
     matching parentheses stand out in color; and also co-authored
     portions of CC mode.

   * Sam Steingold wrote `gulp.el', a facility for asking package
     maintainers for updated versions of their packages via e-mail, and
     `midnight.el', a package for running a command every midnight.

   * Ake Stenhoff and Lars Lindberg wrote `imenu.el', a framework for
     browsing indices made from buffer contents.

   * Peter Stephenson wrote `vcursor.el', which implements a "virtual
     cursor" that you can move with the keyboard and use for copying
     text.

   * Ken Stevens wrote the initial version of `ispell.el' and maintains
     that package since Ispell 3.1 release.

   * Kim F. Storm made many improvements to the Emacs display engine,
     process support, and networking support. He also wrote
     `bindat.el', a package for encoding and decoding binary data; CUA
     mode, which allows Emacs to emulate the standard CUA key bindings;
     `ido.el', a package for selecting buffers and files quickly;
     `keypad.el' for simplified keypad bindings; and `kmacro.el', the
     keyboard macro facility.

   * Martin Stjernholm co-authored CC Mode, a major editing mode for C,
     C++, Objective-C, Java, Pike, CORBA IDL, and AWK code.

   * Steve Strassman did not write `spook.el', and even if he did, he
     really didn't mean for you to use it in an anarchistic way.

   * Olaf Sylvester wrote `bs.el', a package for manipulating Emacs
     buffers.

   * Tibor S<imko and Milan Zamazal wrote `slovak.el', support for
     editing text in Slovak language.

   * Luc Teirlinck wrote `help-at-pt.el', providing local help through
     the keyboard.

   * Jean-Philippe Theberge wrote `thumbs.el', a package for viewing
     image files as "thumbnails."

   * Spencer Thomas wrote the original `dabbrev.el', providing a command
     which completes the partial word before point, based on other
     nearby words for which it is a prefix.  He also wrote the original
     dumping support.

   * Toru Tomabechi contributed to Tibetan support.

   * Markus Triska wrote `linum.el', a minor mode that displays line
     numbers in the left margin.

   * Tom Tromey and Chris Lindblad wrote `tcl.el', a mode for editing
     Tcl/Tk source files and running a Tcl interpreter as an Emacs
     subprocess.

   * Tom Tromey wrote `bug-reference.el', providing clickable links to
     bug reports.

   * Eli Tziperman wrote `rmail-spam-filter.el', a spam filter for
     RMAIL.

   * Daiki Ueno wrote `starttls.el', support for Transport Layer
     Security protocol; `sasl-cram.el' and `sasl-digest.el' (with
     Kenichi Okada), and `sasl.el', support for Simple Authentication
     and Security Layer (SASL); and the EasyPG (and its predecessor PGG)
     package, for GnuPG and PGP support.

   * Masanobu Umeda wrote GNUS, a feature-rich reader for Usenet news
     that was the ancestor of the current Gnus package.  He also wrote
     `prolog.el', a mode for editing Prolog code; `rmailsort.el', a
     package for sorting messages in RMAIL folders; `metamail.el', an
     interface to the Metamail program; `gnus-kill.el', the Kill File
     mode for Gnus; `gnus-mh.el', an mh-e interface for Gnus;
     `gnus-msg.el', a mail and post interface for Gnus; and
     `timezone.el', providing functions for dealing with time zones.

   * Neil W. Van Dyke wrote `webjump.el', a "hot links" package.

   * Didier Verna wrote `rect.el', a package of functions for
     operations on rectangle regions of text.  He also contributed to
     Gnus (q.v.).

   * Ulrik Vieth implemented `meta-mode.el', for editing MetaFont code.

   * Geoffrey Voelker wrote the Windows NT support.  He also wrote
     `dos-w32.el', functions shared by the MS-DOS and MS-Windows ports
     of Emacs, and `w32-fns.el', MS-Windows specific support functions.

   * Johan Vromans wrote `forms.el' and its associated files, a mode for
     filling in forms.  He also wrote `iso-acc.el', a minor mode
     providing electric accent keys.

   * Colin Walters wrote Ibuffer, an enhanced buffer menu.

   * Barry Warsaw wrote `assoc.el', a set of utility functions for
     working with association lists; `cc-mode.el', a mode for editing
     C, C++, and Java code, based on earlier work by Dave Detlefs,
     Stewart Clamen, and Richard Stallman; `elp.el', a profiler for
     Emacs Lisp programs; `man.el', a mode for reading UNIX manual
     pages; `regi.el', providing an AWK-like functionality for use in
     lisp programs; `reporter.el', providing customizable bug reporting
     for lisp packages; and `supercite.el', a minor mode for quoting
     sections of mail messages and news articles.

   * Christoph Wedler wrote `antlr-mode.el', a major mode for ANTLR
     grammar files.

   * Morten Welinder helped port Emacs to MS-DOS, and introduced face
     support into the MS-DOS port of Emacs.  He also wrote
     `desktop.el', facilities for saving some of Emacs's state between
     sessions; `timer.el', the Emacs facility to run commands at a
     given time or frequency, or when Emacs is idle, and its C-level
     support code; `pc-win.el', the MS-DOS "window-system" support;
     `internal.el', an "internal terminal" emulator for the MS-DOS port
     of Emacs; `arc-mode.el', the mode for editing compressed archives;
     `s-region.el', commands for setting the region using the shift key
     and motion commands; and `dos-fns.el', functions for use under
     MS-DOS.

   * Joe Wells wrote the original version of `apropos.el' (q.v.);
     `resume.el', support for processing command-line arguments after
     resuming a suspended Emacs job; and `mail-extr.el', a package for
     extracting names and addresses from mail headers, with
     contributions from Jamie Zawinski.

   * Rodney Whitby and Reto Zimmermann wrote `vhdl-mode.el', a major
     mode for editing VHDL source code.

   * John Wiegley wrote `align.el', a set of commands for aligning text
     according to regular-expression based rules; `isearchb.el' for fast
     buffer switching; `timeclock.el', a package for keeping track of
     time spent on projects; the Baha'i calendar support;
     `pcomplete.el', a programmable completion facility; `remember.el',
     a mode for jotting down things to remember; `eudcb-mab.el', an
     address book backend for the Emacs Unified Directory Client; and
     `eshell', a command shell implemented entirely in Emacs Lisp.  He
     also contributed to Org mode (q.v.).

   * Ed Wilkinson wrote `b2m.c', a program to convert mail files from
     RMAIL format to Unix `mbox' format.

   * Mike Williams wrote `mouse-sel.el', providing enhanced mouse
     selection; and `thingatpt.el', a library of functions for finding
     the "thing" (word, line, s-expression) containing point.

   * Roland Winkler wrote `proced.el', a system process editor.

   * Bill Wohler wrote MH-E, the Emacs interface to the MH mail system;
     making use of earlier work by James R. Larus.  Satyaki Das, Peter
     S.  Galbraith, Stephen Gildea, and Jeffrey C. Honig also wrote
     various MH-E components.

   * Dale R. Worley wrote `emerge.el', a package for interactively
     merging two versions of a file.

   * Francis J. Wright wrote `woman.el', a package for browsing manual
     pages without the `man' command.

   * Tom Wurgler wrote `emacs-lock.el', which makes it harder to exit
     with valuable buffers unsaved.

   * Masatake Yamato wrote `ld-script.el', an editing mode for GNU
     linker scripts, and contributed subword handling in CC mode.

   * Jonathan Yavner wrote `testcover.el', a package for keeping track
     of the testing status of Emacs Lisp code; `unsafep.el' to determine
     if a Lisp form is safe; and the SES spreadsheet package.

   * Ryan Yeske wrote `rcirc.el' a simple Internet Relay Chat client.

   * Ilya Zakharevich and Bob Olson wrote `cperl-mode.el', a major mode
     for editing Perl code.  Ilya Zakharevich also wrote `tmm.el', a
     mode for accessing the Emacs menu bar on a text-mode terminal.

   * Milan Zamazal wrote `czech.el', support for editing Czech text;
     `glasses.el', a package for easier reading of source code that
     uses illegible identifier names; and `tildify.el', commands for
     adding hard spaces to text, TeX, and SGML/HTML files.

   * Victor Zandy wrote `zone.el', a package for people who like to
     zone out in front of Emacs.

   * Eli Zaretskii made many standard Emacs features work on MS-DOS and
     Microsoft Windows.  He also wrote `tty-colors.el', which
     implements transparent mapping of X colors to tty colors; and
     `rxvt.el'.

   * Jamie Zawinski wrote much of the support for faces and X
     selections.  With Hallvard Furuseth, he wrote the optimizing byte
     compiler used from Emacs 19 onwards.  He also wrote
     `mailabbrev.el', a package that provides automatic expansion of
     mail aliases, and `tar-mode.el', which provides simple viewing and
     editing commands for tar files.

   * Andrew Zhilin created the Emacs 22 icons.

   * Shenghuo Zhu wrote `binhex.el', a package for reading and writing
     binhex files; `mm-partial.el', message/partial support for MIME
     messages; `rfc1843.el', an HZ decoding package; `uudecode.el', an
     Emacs Lisp decoder for uuencoded data; and `webmail.el', an
     interface to Web mail.  He also wrote several other Gnus
     components.

   * Ian T. Zimmerman wrote `gametree.el'.

   * Reto Zimmermann wrote `vera-mode.el'.

   * Neal Ziring and Felix S. T. Wu wrote `vi.el', an emulation of the
     VI text editor.

   * Detlev Zundel wrote `re-builder.el', a package for building regexps
     with visual feedback.



File: emacs,  Node: Key Index,  Next: Option Index,  Prev: Glossary,  Up: Top

Key (Character) Index
*********************

 [index ]
* Menu:

* ! (Dired):                             Shell Commands in Dired.
                                                              (line   6)
* " (TeX mode):                          TeX Editing.         (line  25)
* # (Dired):                             Flagging Many Files. (line  30)
* $ (Dired):                             Hiding Subdirectories.
                                                              (line  10)
* % & (Dired):                           Flagging Many Files. (line  51)
* % C (Dired):                           Transforming File Names.
                                                              (line  33)
* % d (Dired):                           Flagging Many Files. (line  57)
* % g (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line 112)
* % H (Dired):                           Transforming File Names.
                                                              (line  34)
* % l (Dired):                           Transforming File Names.
                                                              (line  27)
* % m (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line 103)
* % R (Dired):                           Transforming File Names.
                                                              (line  32)
* % S (Dired):                           Transforming File Names.
                                                              (line  35)
* % u (Dired):                           Transforming File Names.
                                                              (line  21)
* * ! (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  49)
* * % (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line 103)
* * * (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  22)
* * / (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  30)
* * ? (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  54)
* * @ (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  26)
* * c (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  81)
* * C-n (Dired):                         Marks vs Flags.      (line  67)
* * C-p (Dired):                         Marks vs Flags.      (line  72)
* * DEL (Dired):                         Marks vs Flags.      (line  44)
* * m (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  17)
* * s (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  35)
* * t (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  76)
* * u (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  40)
* + (Dired):                             Misc Dired Features. (line   6)
* . (Calendar mode):                     Specified Dates.     (line  37)
* . (Dired):                             Flagging Many Files. (line  38)
* . (Rmail):                             Rmail Scrolling.     (line  27)
* / (Rmail):                             Rmail Scrolling.     (line  27)
* < (Calendar mode):                     Scroll Calendar.     (line  28)
* < (Dired):                             Subdirectory Motion. (line  30)
* < (Rmail):                             Rmail Motion.        (line  90)
* <TAB> (Help mode):                     Help Mode.           (line  42)
* = (Dired):                             Comparison in Dired. (line  11)
* > (Calendar mode):                     Scroll Calendar.     (line  28)
* > (Dired):                             Subdirectory Motion. (line  35)
* > (Rmail):                             Rmail Motion.        (line  90)
* ^ (Dired):                             Dired Visiting.      (line  45)
* a (Calendar mode):                     Holidays.            (line  50)
* A (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line 119)
* a (Rmail):                             Rmail Labels.        (line  34)
* AltGr (MS-Windows):                    Windows Keyboard.    (line 105)
* B (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line 114)
* b (Rmail summary):                     Rmail Summary Edit.  (line 102)
* b (Rmail):                             Rmail Basics.        (line  35)
* BS (MS-DOS):                           MS-DOS Keyboard.     (line   6)
* C (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  34)
* c (Rmail):                             Rmail Reply.         (line 106)
* C-/:                                   Undo.                (line  21)
* C-<SPC> C-<SPC>:                       Persistent Mark.     (line  54)
* C-<TAB>:                               File Name Cache.     (line   6)
* C-@:                                   Setting Mark.        (line  28)
* C-\:                                   Select Input Method. (line  28)
* C-]:                                   Quitting.            (line  70)
* C-_:                                   Undo.                (line  21)
* C-_ (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line 120)
* C-a:                                   Moving Point.        (line  16)
* C-a (Calendar mode):                   Move to Beginning or End.
                                                              (line  11)
* C-b:                                   Moving Point.        (line  16)
* C-b (Calendar mode):                   Calendar Unit Motion.
                                                              (line  34)
* C-BREAK (MS-DOS):                      MS-DOS Keyboard.     (line  12)
* C-c ' (Picture mode):                  Insert in Picture.   (line   6)
* C-c , <SPC>:                           Semantic.            (line  36)
* C-c , J:                               Semantic.            (line  32)
* C-c , j:                               Semantic.            (line  28)
* C-c , l:                               Semantic.            (line  44)
* C-c . (C mode):                        Custom C Indent.     (line  26)
* C-c . (Picture mode):                  Insert in Picture.   (line   6)
* C-c . (Shell mode):                    Shell Ring.          (line  21)
* C-c / (Picture mode):                  Insert in Picture.   (line   6)
* C-c / (SGML mode):                     HTML Mode.           (line  52)
* C-c 8 (SGML mode):                     HTML Mode.           (line  57)
* C-c ; (Fortran mode):                  Fortran Comments.    (line  80)
* C-c < (GUD):                           Commands of GUD.     (line  80)
* C-c < (Picture mode):                  Insert in Picture.   (line   6)
* C-c <DEL> (C Mode):                    Hungry Delete.       (line  14)
* C-c <DELETE> (C Mode):                 Hungry Delete.       (line  20)
* C-c > (GUD):                           Commands of GUD.     (line  85)
* C-c > (Picture mode):                  Insert in Picture.   (line   6)
* C-c ? (SGML mode):                     HTML Mode.           (line  48)
* C-c @ (Outline minor mode):            Outline Mode.        (line  30)
* C-c @ C-h:                             Hideshow.            (line  16)
* C-c @ C-l:                             Hideshow.            (line  16)
* C-c @ C-M-h:                           Hideshow.            (line  16)
* C-c @ C-M-s:                           Hideshow.            (line  16)
* C-c @ C-r:                             Hideshow.            (line  16)
* C-c @ C-s:                             Hideshow.            (line  16)
* C-c [ (Enriched mode):                 Format Indentation.  (line  52)
* C-c \ (Picture mode):                  Insert in Picture.   (line   6)
* C-c ] (Enriched mode):                 Format Indentation.  (line  52)
* C-c ^ (Picture mode):                  Insert in Picture.   (line   6)
* C-c ` (Picture mode):                  Insert in Picture.   (line   6)
* C-c C-<DEL> (C Mode):                  Hungry Delete.       (line  14)
* C-c C-<DELETE> (C Mode):               Hungry Delete.       (line  20)
* C-c C-\ (C mode):                      Other C Commands.    (line  57)
* C-c C-\ (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line  78)
* C-c C-a (C mode):                      Electric C.          (line  29)
* C-c C-a (F90 mode):                    Fortran Motion.      (line  31)
* C-c C-a (Message mode):                Mail Misc.           (line   6)
* C-c C-a (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  80)
* C-c C-a (SGML mode):                   HTML Mode.           (line  27)
* C-c C-a (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line  43)
* C-c C-b (Message mode):                Header Editing.      (line  43)
* C-c C-b (Outline mode):                Outline Motion.      (line  36)
* C-c C-b (Picture mode):                Insert in Picture.   (line  48)
* C-c C-b (SGML mode):                   HTML Mode.           (line  36)
* C-c C-b (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line 111)
* C-c C-b (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line  46)
* C-c C-c (C mode):                      Multi-Line Comments. (line  14)
* C-c C-c (Edit Abbrevs):                Editing Abbrevs.     (line  42)
* C-c C-c (Edit Tab Stops):              Tab Stops.           (line  10)
* C-c C-c (Message mode):                Mail Sending.        (line  16)
* C-c C-c (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  58)
* C-c C-c (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line  68)
* C-c C-c (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line 148)
* C-c C-d (C Mode):                      Hungry Delete.       (line  20)
* C-c C-d (Fortran mode):                ForIndent Commands.  (line  30)
* C-c C-d (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  68)
* C-c C-d (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  63)
* C-c C-d (Picture mode):                Basic Picture.       (line  43)
* C-c C-d (SGML mode):                   HTML Mode.           (line  42)
* C-c C-e (C mode):                      Other C Commands.    (line  45)
* C-c C-e (F90 mode):                    Fortran Motion.      (line  23)
* C-c C-e (LaTeX mode):                  LaTeX Editing.       (line  28)
* C-c C-e (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  58)
* C-c C-e (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line 101)
* C-c C-f (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  97)
* C-c C-f (Outline mode):                Outline Motion.      (line  36)
* C-c C-f (Picture mode):                Insert in Picture.   (line  48)
* C-c C-f (SGML mode):                   HTML Mode.           (line  31)
* C-c C-f (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line 105)
* C-c C-f (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line 109)
* C-c C-f C-b (Message mode):            Header Editing.      (line  38)
* C-c C-f C-c (Message mode):            Header Editing.      (line  38)
* C-c C-f C-f (Message mode):            Header Editing.      (line  38)
* C-c C-f C-r (Message mode):            Header Editing.      (line  38)
* C-c C-f C-s (Message mode):            Header Editing.      (line  38)
* C-c C-f C-t (Message mode):            Header Editing.      (line  38)
* C-c C-f C-w (Message mode):            Header Editing.      (line  38)
* C-c C-i (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  52)
* C-c C-i (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  76)
* C-c C-j (Term mode):                   Term Mode.           (line  13)
* C-c C-k (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  70)
* C-c C-k (Picture mode):                Rectangles in Picture.
                                                              (line  27)
* C-c C-k (Term mode):                   Term Mode.           (line  16)
* C-c C-k (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line  77)
* C-c C-l (C mode):                      Electric C.          (line  19)
* C-c C-l (Calendar mode):               General Calendar.    (line  27)
* C-c C-l (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  35)
* C-c C-l (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  70)
* C-c C-l (Shell mode):                  Shell Ring.          (line  24)
* C-c C-l (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line  77)
* C-c C-n (C mode):                      Motion in C.         (line  35)
* C-c C-n (Fortran mode):                Fortran Motion.      (line  13)
* C-c C-n (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  47)
* C-c C-n (Outline mode):                Outline Motion.      (line  29)
* C-c C-n (Rmail):                       Rmail Motion.        (line  83)
* C-c C-n (SGML mode):                   HTML Mode.           (line  11)
* C-c C-n (Shell mode):                  Shell History Copying.
                                                              (line   9)
* C-c C-o (LaTeX mode):                  LaTeX Editing.       (line  17)
* C-c C-o (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  92)
* C-c C-o (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line  83)
* C-c C-p (C mode):                      Motion in C.         (line  30)
* C-c C-p (Fortran mode):                Fortran Motion.      (line  17)
* C-c C-p (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  56)
* C-c C-p (Outline mode):                Outline Motion.      (line  29)
* C-c C-p (Rmail):                       Rmail Motion.        (line  83)
* C-c C-p (Shell mode):                  Shell History Copying.
                                                              (line   6)
* C-c C-p (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line  46)
* C-c C-q (C mode):                      C Indent.            (line   9)
* C-c C-q (Message mode):                Citing Mail.         (line  24)
* C-c C-q (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  88)
* C-c C-q (Term mode):                   Paging in Term.      (line   9)
* C-c C-q (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line  46)
* C-c C-r (Fortran mode):                Fortran Columns.     (line  33)
* C-c C-r (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  62)
* C-c C-r (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line  96)
* C-c C-r (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line  87)
* C-c C-s (C mode):                      Other C Commands.    (line  76)
* C-c C-s (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  41)
* C-c C-s (Message mode):                Mail Sending.        (line  16)
* C-c C-s (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  63)
* C-c C-s (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line  89)
* C-c C-t (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  74)
* C-c C-t (Outline mode):                Outline Visibility.  (line  80)
* C-c C-t (SGML mode):                   HTML Mode.           (line  15)
* C-c C-u (C mode):                      Motion in C.         (line  20)
* C-c C-u (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  90)
* C-c C-u (Outline mode):                Outline Motion.      (line  36)
* C-c C-u (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line  60)
* C-c C-v (SGML mode):                   HTML Mode.           (line  62)
* C-c C-v (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line  46)
* C-c C-w (Fortran mode):                Fortran Columns.     (line  52)
* C-c C-w (Message mode):                Mail Signature.      (line  20)
* C-c C-w (Picture mode):                Rectangles in Picture.
                                                              (line  27)
* C-c C-w (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line  65)
* C-c C-x:                               Foldout.             (line  39)
* C-c C-x (Picture mode):                Rectangles in Picture.
                                                              (line  38)
* C-c C-x (Shell mode):                  Shell Ring.          (line  18)
* C-c C-y (Message mode):                Citing Mail.         (line  13)
* C-c C-y (Picture mode):                Rectangles in Picture.
                                                              (line  38)
* C-c C-z:                               Foldout.             (line  16)
* C-c C-z (Shell mode):                  Shell Mode.          (line  73)
* C-c RET (Shell mode):                  Shell History Copying.
                                                              (line  12)
* C-c TAB (Picture mode):                Tabs in Picture.     (line  25)
* C-c TAB (SGML mode):                   HTML Mode.           (line  66)
* C-c TAB (TeX mode):                    TeX Print.           (line 138)
* C-c { (TeX mode):                      TeX Editing.         (line  51)
* C-c } (TeX mode):                      TeX Editing.         (line  51)
* C-d (Rmail):                           Rmail Deletion.      (line  29)
* C-d (Shell mode):                      Shell Mode.          (line  37)
* C-Down-Mouse-1:                        Buffer Menus.        (line  16)
* C-e:                                   Moving Point.        (line  16)
* C-e (Calendar mode):                   Move to Beginning or End.
                                                              (line  12)
* C-f:                                   Moving Point.        (line  16)
* C-f (Calendar mode):                   Calendar Unit Motion.
                                                              (line  34)
* C-g:                                   Quitting.            (line  32)
* C-g (MS-DOS):                          MS-DOS Keyboard.     (line  12)
* C-h:                                   Help.                (line   6)
* C-h .:                                 Help Echo.           (line  14)
* C-h a:                                 Apropos.             (line  31)
* C-h b:                                 Misc Help.           (line  42)
* C-h C:                                 Coding Systems.      (line  42)
* C-h c:                                 Key Help.            (line   6)
* C-h C-\:                               Select Input Method. (line  14)
* C-h C-c:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h C-d:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h C-e:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h C-f:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h C-h:                               Help.                (line  13)
* C-h C-m:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h C-n:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h C-o:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h C-p:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h C-t:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h C-w:                               Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h d:                                 Apropos.             (line  81)
* C-h e:                                 Misc Help.           (line  33)
* C-h F:                                 Name Help.           (line  55)
* C-h f:                                 Name Help.           (line   6)
* C-h g:                                 Help Files.          (line  13)
* C-h h:                                 International Chars. (line  18)
* C-h I:                                 Select Input Method. (line  14)
* C-h i:                                 Misc Help.           (line   6)
* C-h K:                                 Key Help.            (line  16)
* C-h k:                                 Key Help.            (line  12)
* C-h L:                                 Language Environments.
                                                              (line  76)
* C-h l:                                 Misc Help.           (line  28)
* C-h m:                                 Misc Help.           (line  37)
* C-h p:                                 Library Keywords.    (line   6)
* C-h s:                                 Syntax.              (line  18)
* C-h S <1>:                             Info Lookup.         (line   6)
* C-h S:                                 Misc Help.           (line  22)
* C-h t:                                 Basic.               (line   6)
* C-h v:                                 Name Help.           (line  40)
* C-h w:                                 Key Help.            (line  25)
* C-j:                                   Basic Indent.        (line  30)
* C-j (and major modes):                 Major Modes.         (line   6)
* C-j (Lisp Interaction mode):           Lisp Interaction.    (line  10)
* C-j (MS-DOS):                          MS-DOS Keyboard.     (line  31)
* C-j (TeX mode):                        TeX Editing.         (line  58)
* C-k:                                   Killing by Lines.    (line  12)
* C-k (Gnus):                            Summary of Gnus.     (line  40)
* C-l:                                   Scrolling.           (line  40)
* C-M-%:                                 Query Replace.       (line  24)
* C-M-.:                                 Find Tag.            (line  76)
* C-M-/:                                 Dynamic Abbrevs.     (line  12)
* C-M-<SPC>:                             Expressions.         (line  68)
* C-M-@:                                 Expressions.         (line  68)
* C-M-\:                                 Indentation Commands.
                                                              (line  37)
* C-M-a:                                 Moving by Defuns.    (line  19)
* C-M-b:                                 Expressions.         (line  37)
* C-M-c:                                 Recursive Edit.      (line  12)
* C-M-d:                                 Moving by Parens.    (line  42)
* C-M-d (Dired):                         Subdirectory Motion. (line  26)
* C-M-e:                                 Moving by Defuns.    (line  19)
* C-M-f:                                 Expressions.         (line  37)
* C-M-f (Rmail):                         Rmail Make Summary.  (line  62)
* C-M-h:                                 Moving by Defuns.    (line  19)
* C-M-h (C mode):                        Moving by Defuns.    (line  32)
* C-M-j:                                 Multi-Line Comments. (line   6)
* C-M-j (Fortran mode):                  ForIndent Commands.  (line  25)
* C-M-k:                                 Expressions.         (line  54)
* C-M-l:                                 Scrolling.           (line 117)
* C-M-l (Rmail):                         Rmail Make Summary.  (line  41)
* C-M-l (Shell mode):                    Shell Mode.          (line  96)
* C-M-n:                                 Moving by Parens.    (line  31)
* C-M-n (Dired):                         Subdirectory Motion. (line  15)
* C-M-n (Fortran mode):                  Fortran Motion.      (line  36)
* C-M-n (Rmail):                         Rmail Labels.        (line  43)
* C-M-o:                                 Indentation Commands.
                                                              (line  17)
* C-M-p:                                 Moving by Parens.    (line  31)
* C-M-p (Dired):                         Subdirectory Motion. (line  19)
* C-M-p (Fortran mode):                  Fortran Motion.      (line  44)
* C-M-p (Rmail):                         Rmail Labels.        (line  43)
* C-M-q:                                 Multi-line Indent.   (line  26)
* C-M-q (C mode):                        C Indent.            (line  13)
* C-M-q (Fortran mode):                  ForIndent Commands.  (line  21)
* C-M-r:                                 Regexp Search.       (line  19)
* C-M-r (Rmail):                         Rmail Make Summary.  (line  45)
* C-M-s:                                 Regexp Search.       (line  19)
* C-M-s (Rmail):                         Rmail Make Summary.  (line  58)
* C-M-t:                                 Expressions.         (line  58)
* C-M-t (Rmail):                         Rmail Make Summary.  (line  52)
* C-M-u:                                 Moving by Parens.    (line  35)
* C-M-u (Dired):                         Subdirectory Motion. (line  23)
* C-M-v:                                 Other Window.        (line  34)
* C-M-w:                                 Appending Kills.     (line  38)
* C-M-x (Emacs-Lisp mode):               Lisp Eval.           (line  44)
* C-M-x (Lisp mode):                     External Lisp.       (line  31)
* C-Mouse-1:                             Menu Mouse Clicks.   (line  10)
* C-Mouse-2:                             Menu Mouse Clicks.   (line  16)
* C-mouse-2 (mode line):                 Mode Line Mouse.     (line  31)
* C-Mouse-2 (scroll bar) <1>:            Mode Line Mouse.     (line  34)
* C-Mouse-2 (scroll bar):                Split Window.        (line  32)
* C-Mouse-3:                             Menu Mouse Clicks.   (line  20)
* C-Mouse-3 (when menu bar is disabled): Menu Bars.           (line  13)
* C-n:                                   Moving Point.        (line  16)
* C-n (Calendar mode):                   Calendar Unit Motion.
                                                              (line  34)
* C-n (Dired):                           Dired Navigation.    (line   6)
* C-n (Gnus Group mode):                 Summary of Gnus.     (line  80)
* C-n (Gnus Summary mode):               Summary of Gnus.     (line  80)
* C-o:                                   Blank Lines.         (line  16)
* C-o (Dired):                           Dired Visiting.      (line  27)
* C-o (Occur mode):                      Other Repeating Search.
                                                              (line  32)
* C-o (Rmail):                           Rmail Output.        (line  20)
* C-p:                                   Moving Point.        (line  16)
* C-p (Calendar mode):                   Calendar Unit Motion.
                                                              (line  34)
* C-p (Dired):                           Dired Navigation.    (line   6)
* C-p (Gnus Group mode):                 Summary of Gnus.     (line  80)
* C-p (Gnus Summary mode):               Summary of Gnus.     (line  80)
* C-q:                                   Inserting Text.      (line  26)
* C-r:                                   Basic Isearch.       (line  48)
* C-s:                                   Basic Isearch.       (line  12)
* C-S-backspace:                         Killing by Lines.    (line  35)
* C-S-Mouse-3 (FFAP):                    FFAP.                (line  68)
* C-SPC:                                 Setting Mark.        (line  28)
* C-SPC C-SPC:                           Mark Ring.           (line  18)
* C-t:                                   Transpose.           (line  18)
* C-t d (Image-Dired):                   Image-Dired.         (line  10)
* C-u:                                   Arguments.           (line  41)
* C-u C-/:                               Undo.                (line  52)
* C-u C-c C-w (Fortran mode):            Fortran Columns.     (line  57)
* C-u C-SPC:                             Mark Ring.           (line  27)
* C-u C-x C-x:                           Persistent Mark.     (line  60)
* C-u C-x v =:                           Old Revisions.       (line  45)
* C-u M-;:                               Comment Commands.    (line  59)
* C-u TAB:                               Multi-line Indent.   (line  39)
* C-v:                                   Scrolling.           (line  81)
* C-v (Calendar mode):                   Scroll Calendar.     (line  34)
* C-w:                                   Other Kill Commands. (line   6)
* C-x #:                                 Invoking emacsclient.
                                                              (line  31)
* C-x $:                                 Selective Display.   (line   6)
* C-x (:                                 Basic Keyboard Macro.
                                                              (line  87)
* C-x ):                                 Basic Keyboard Macro.
                                                              (line  87)
* C-x +:                                 Change Window.       (line  70)
* C-x -:                                 Change Window.       (line  65)
* C-x .:                                 Fill Prefix.         (line  27)
* C-x 0:                                 Change Window.       (line  35)
* C-x 1:                                 Change Window.       (line  46)
* C-x 2:                                 Split Window.        (line  17)
* C-x 3:                                 Split Window.        (line  23)
* C-x 4:                                 Pop Up Window.       (line   6)
* C-x 4 .:                               Find Tag.            (line  56)
* C-x 4 0:                               Change Window.       (line  43)
* C-x 4 a:                               Change Log Commands. (line   6)
* C-x 4 b:                               Select Buffer.       (line  66)
* C-x 4 b (Iswitchb mode):               Iswitchb.            (line   6)
* C-x 4 c:                               Indirect Buffers.    (line  19)
* C-x 4 C-o (Iswitchb mode):             Iswitchb.            (line   6)
* C-x 4 d:                               Dired Enter.         (line  29)
* C-x 4 f:                               Visiting.            (line 153)
* C-x 4 f (FFAP):                        FFAP.                (line  40)
* C-x 4 m:                               Sending Mail.        (line  27)
* C-x 5:                                 Creating Frames.     (line   6)
* C-x 5 .:                               Find Tag.            (line  56)
* C-x 5 0:                               Frame Commands.      (line  13)
* C-x 5 1:                               Frame Commands.      (line  22)
* C-x 5 2:                               Creating Frames.     (line  18)
* C-x 5 b:                               Select Buffer.       (line  74)
* C-x 5 b (Iswitchb mode):               Iswitchb.            (line   6)
* C-x 5 d:                               Dired Enter.         (line  29)
* C-x 5 f:                               Visiting.            (line 161)
* C-x 5 f (FFAP):                        FFAP.                (line  50)
* C-x 5 m:                               Sending Mail.        (line  27)
* C-x 5 o:                               Frame Commands.      (line  17)
* C-x 5 r:                               Creating Frames.     (line  43)
* C-x 6 1:                               Two-Column.          (line  60)
* C-x 6 2:                               Two-Column.          (line  12)
* C-x 6 b:                               Two-Column.          (line  35)
* C-x 6 d:                               Two-Column.          (line  65)
* C-x 6 RET:                             Two-Column.          (line  55)
* C-x 6 s:                               Two-Column.          (line  22)
* C-x 8:                                 Unibyte Mode.        (line  67)
* C-x 8 RET:                             Inserting Text.      (line  59)
* C-x ;:                                 Options for Comments.
                                                              (line   6)
* C-x <:                                 Horizontal Scrolling.
                                                              (line  39)
* C-x <LEFT>:                            Select Buffer.       (line  60)
* C-x <RET> F:                           File Name Coding.    (line  13)
* C-x <RIGHT>:                           Select Buffer.       (line  60)
* C-x = <1>:                             International Chars. (line  35)
* C-x =:                                 Position Info.       (line  54)
* C-x >:                                 Horizontal Scrolling.
                                                              (line  39)
* C-x [:                                 Pages.               (line  28)
* C-x [ (Calendar mode):                 Calendar Unit Motion.
                                                              (line  43)
* C-x ]:                                 Pages.               (line  28)
* C-x ] (Calendar mode):                 Calendar Unit Motion.
                                                              (line  43)
* C-x ^:                                 Change Window.       (line  51)
* C-x `:                                 Compilation Mode.    (line  56)
* C-x a g:                               Defining Abbrevs.    (line  31)
* C-x a i g:                             Defining Abbrevs.    (line  49)
* C-x a i l:                             Defining Abbrevs.    (line  49)
* C-x a l:                               Defining Abbrevs.    (line  43)
* C-x b:                                 Select Buffer.       (line  28)
* C-x b (Iswitchb mode):                 Iswitchb.            (line   6)
* C-x C-+:                               Temporary Face Changes.
                                                              (line   8)
* C-x C--:                               Temporary Face Changes.
                                                              (line   8)
* C-x C-0:                               Temporary Face Changes.
                                                              (line   8)
* C-x C-<SPC>:                           Global Mark Ring.    (line  11)
* C-x C-=:                               Temporary Face Changes.
                                                              (line   8)
* C-x C-a (GUD):                         Commands of GUD.     (line  28)
* C-x C-a C-j (GUD):                     Commands of GUD.     (line 104)
* C-x C-a C-w (GUD):                     Watch Expressions.   (line   6)
* C-x C-b:                               List Buffers.        (line   9)
* C-x C-c:                               Exiting.             (line  13)
* C-x C-d:                               Directories.         (line  26)
* C-x C-e:                               Lisp Eval.           (line  58)
* C-x C-f:                               Visiting.            (line  52)
* C-x C-f (FFAP):                        FFAP.                (line  23)
* C-x C-k b:                             Save Keyboard Macro. (line  28)
* C-x C-k C-a:                           Keyboard Macro Counter.
                                                              (line  65)
* C-x C-k C-c:                           Keyboard Macro Counter.
                                                              (line  57)
* C-x C-k C-e:                           Edit Keyboard Macro. (line  16)
* C-x C-k C-f:                           Keyboard Macro Counter.
                                                              (line  71)
* C-x C-k C-i:                           Keyboard Macro Counter.
                                                              (line  31)
* C-x C-k C-k:                           Keyboard Macro Ring. (line  33)
* C-x C-k C-n:                           Keyboard Macro Ring. (line  43)
* C-x C-k C-p:                           Keyboard Macro Ring. (line  43)
* C-x C-k e:                             Edit Keyboard Macro. (line  22)
* C-x C-k l:                             Edit Keyboard Macro. (line  27)
* C-x C-k n:                             Save Keyboard Macro. (line  17)
* C-x C-k r:                             Basic Keyboard Macro.
                                                              (line  82)
* C-x C-k RET:                           Edit Keyboard Macro. (line  16)
* C-x C-k SPC:                           Keyboard Macro Step-Edit.
                                                              (line   6)
* C-x C-l:                               Case.                (line  47)
* C-x C-n:                               Moving Point.        (line 104)
* C-x C-o:                               Blank Lines.         (line  16)
* C-x C-p:                               Pages.               (line  34)
* C-x C-q:                               Misc Buffer.         (line  18)
* C-x C-r:                               Visiting.            (line 149)
* C-x C-r (FFAP):                        FFAP.                (line  27)
* C-x C-s:                               Save Commands.       (line  26)
* C-x C-t:                               Transpose.           (line  31)
* C-x C-u:                               Case.                (line  47)
* C-x C-v:                               Visiting.            (line 123)
* C-x C-v (FFAP):                        FFAP.                (line  30)
* C-x C-w:                               Save Commands.       (line  99)
* C-x C-x:                               Setting Mark.        (line  38)
* C-x C-z:                               External Lisp.       (line  12)
* C-x d:                                 Dired Enter.         (line   6)
* C-x d (FFAP):                          FFAP.                (line  33)
* C-x DEL:                               Sentences.           (line  40)
* C-x e:                                 Basic Keyboard Macro.
                                                              (line  87)
* C-x ESC ESC:                           Repetition.          (line  20)
* C-x f:                                 Fill Commands.       (line  51)
* C-x h:                                 Marking Objects.     (line  38)
* C-x i:                                 Misc File Ops.       (line  22)
* C-x k:                                 Kill Buffer.         (line  21)
* C-x l:                                 Pages.               (line  49)
* C-x m:                                 Sending Mail.        (line   6)
* C-x n d:                               Narrowing.           (line  41)
* C-x n n:                               Narrowing.           (line  36)
* C-x n p:                               Narrowing.           (line  41)
* C-x n w:                               Narrowing.           (line  46)
* C-x o:                                 Other Window.        (line  20)
* C-x q:                                 Keyboard Macro Query.
                                                              (line  14)
* C-x r +:                               RegNumbers.          (line  14)
* C-x r b:                               Bookmarks.           (line  27)
* C-x r c:                               Rectangles.          (line  91)
* C-x r d:                               Rectangles.          (line  61)
* C-x r f:                               RegConfig.           (line   6)
* C-x r i:                               RegText.             (line  38)
* C-x r j:                               RegPos.              (line  19)
* C-x r k:                               Rectangles.          (line  61)
* C-x r l:                               Bookmarks.           (line  34)
* C-x r m:                               Bookmarks.           (line  27)
* C-x r n:                               RegNumbers.          (line  11)
* C-x r o:                               Rectangles.          (line  91)
* C-x r r:                               RegRect.             (line  10)
* C-x r s:                               RegText.             (line  23)
* C-x r SPC:                             RegPos.              (line  14)
* C-x r t:                               Rectangles.          (line 103)
* C-x r w:                               RegConfig.           (line   6)
* C-x r y:                               Rectangles.          (line  75)
* C-x RET:                               International Chars. (line  32)
* C-x RET c:                             Text Coding.         (line  36)
* C-x RET C-\:                           Select Input Method. (line  22)
* C-x RET f:                             Text Coding.         (line  23)
* C-x RET k:                             Terminal Coding.     (line  27)
* C-x RET p:                             Communication Coding.
                                                              (line  44)
* C-x RET r:                             Text Coding.         (line  67)
* C-x RET t:                             Terminal Coding.     (line  12)
* C-x RET X:                             Communication Coding.
                                                              (line  24)
* C-x RET x:                             Communication Coding.
                                                              (line  24)
* C-x s:                                 Save Commands.       (line  42)
* C-x SPC:                               Commands of GUD.     (line  26)
* C-x TAB:                               Indentation Commands.
                                                              (line  37)
* C-x TAB (Enriched mode):               Format Indentation.  (line  15)
* C-x u:                                 Undo.                (line  21)
* C-x v =:                               Old Revisions.       (line  35)
* C-x v a:                               Change Logs and VC.  (line  11)
* C-x v b:                               Local Version Control.
                                                              (line  74)
* C-x v c:                               VC Undo.             (line  25)
* C-x v d:                               VC Directory Mode.   (line   6)
* C-x v g:                               Old Revisions.       (line  85)
* C-x v h:                               Version Headers.     (line  29)
* C-x v i:                               Registering.         (line   6)
* C-x v l:                               VC Change Log.       (line  21)
* C-x v m:                               Merging.             (line  16)
* C-x v r:                               Making Revision Tags.
                                                              (line  13)
* C-x v s:                               Making Revision Tags.
                                                              (line   9)
* C-x v u:                               VC Undo.             (line  14)
* C-x v v:                               Basic VC Editing.    (line  23)
* C-x v ~:                               Old Revisions.       (line  28)
* C-x w b:                               Highlight Interactively.
                                                              (line  54)
* C-x w h:                               Highlight Interactively.
                                                              (line  25)
* C-x w i:                               Highlight Interactively.
                                                              (line  65)
* C-x w l:                               Highlight Interactively.
                                                              (line  50)
* C-x w r:                               Highlight Interactively.
                                                              (line  38)
* C-x z:                                 Repeating.           (line  12)
* C-x }:                                 Change Window.       (line  51)
* C-y:                                   Kill Ring.           (line  15)
* C-z:                                   Exiting.             (line  48)
* C-z (X windows):                       Frame Commands.      (line   9)
* d (Calendar mode):                     Displaying the Diary.
                                                              (line  36)
* D (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  48)
* d (Dired):                             Dired Deletion.      (line  22)
* D (GDB breakpoints buffer):            Breakpoints Buffer.  (line  19)
* D (GDB speedbar):                      Watch Expressions.   (line  25)
* d (Rmail):                             Rmail Deletion.      (line  29)
* DEL (and major modes):                 Major Modes.         (line   6)
* DEL (Dired):                           Dired Deletion.      (line  28)
* DEL (Gnus):                            Summary of Gnus.     (line  66)
* DEL (MS-DOS):                          MS-DOS Keyboard.     (line   6)
* DEL (programming modes):               Program Modes.       (line  33)
* DEL (Rmail):                           Rmail Scrolling.     (line  23)
* DOWN:                                  Moving Point.        (line  16)
* e (Dired):                             Dired Visiting.      (line  18)
* e (Rmail):                             Rmail Editing.       (line  15)
* ESC ESC ESC:                           Quitting.            (line  78)
* f (Dired):                             Dired Visiting.      (line  12)
* f (Rmail):                             Rmail Reply.         (line  75)
* F1:                                    Help.                (line   6)
* F10:                                   Menu Bar.            (line  10)
* F10 (MS-Windows):                      Windows Keyboard.    (line  17)
* F2 1:                                  Two-Column.          (line  60)
* F2 2:                                  Two-Column.          (line  12)
* F2 b:                                  Two-Column.          (line  35)
* F2 d:                                  Two-Column.          (line  65)
* F2 RET:                                Two-Column.          (line  55)
* F2 s:                                  Two-Column.          (line  22)
* F3:                                    Basic Keyboard Macro.
                                                              (line  25)
* F4:                                    Basic Keyboard Macro.
                                                              (line  25)
* g (Dired):                             Dired Updating.      (line  29)
* G (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  81)
* g (Rmail):                             Rmail Files.         (line  54)
* g CHAR (Calendar mode):                From Other Calendar. (line  10)
* g D (Calendar mode):                   Specified Dates.     (line  29)
* g d (Calendar mode):                   Specified Dates.     (line  24)
* g m (Calendar mode):                   Mayan Calendar.      (line  42)
* g w (Calendar mode):                   Specified Dates.     (line  29)
* h (Calendar mode):                     Holidays.            (line  33)
* H (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  64)
* h (Rmail):                             Rmail Make Summary.  (line  36)
* Help:                                  Help.                (line   6)
* i (Dired):                             Subdirectories in Dired.
                                                              (line  18)
* i (Rmail):                             Rmail Files.         (line  25)
* i a (Calendar mode):                   Special Diary Entries.
                                                              (line  29)
* i b (Calendar mode):                   Special Diary Entries.
                                                              (line  54)
* i c (Calendar mode):                   Special Diary Entries.
                                                              (line  59)
* i d (Calendar mode):                   Adding to Diary.     (line  27)
* i m (Calendar mode):                   Adding to Diary.     (line  32)
* i w (Calendar mode):                   Adding to Diary.     (line  32)
* i y (Calendar mode):                   Adding to Diary.     (line  32)
* INSERT:                                Minor Modes.         (line  65)
* j (Dired):                             Dired Navigation.    (line  16)
* j (Rmail):                             Rmail Motion.        (line  90)
* k (Dired):                             Dired Updating.      (line  51)
* k (Rmail):                             Rmail Labels.        (line  34)
* l (Dired):                             Dired Updating.      (line  34)
* L (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line 110)
* l (Gnus Group mode):                   Summary of Gnus.     (line  29)
* L (Gnus Group mode):                   Summary of Gnus.     (line  25)
* l (Rmail):                             Rmail Make Summary.  (line  41)
* LEFT:                                  Moving Point.        (line  16)
* m (Calendar mode):                     Displaying the Diary.
                                                              (line  51)
* M (Calendar mode):                     Lunar Phases.        (line  19)
* M (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  76)
* m (Dired):                             Marks vs Flags.      (line  17)
* m (Rmail):                             Rmail Reply.         (line 100)
* M-!:                                   Single Shell.        (line   6)
* M-$:                                   Spelling.            (line  49)
* M-$ (Dired):                           Hiding Subdirectories.
                                                              (line  15)
* M-%:                                   Query Replace.       (line  14)
* M-% (Incremental search):              Special Isearch.     (line  36)
* M-':                                   Expanding Abbrevs.   (line  32)
* M-*:                                   Find Tag.            (line  67)
* M-,:                                   Tags Search.         (line  31)
* M--:                                   Arguments.           (line  15)
* M-- M-c:                               Fixing Case.         (line  15)
* M-- M-l:                               Fixing Case.         (line  15)
* M-- M-u:                               Fixing Case.         (line  15)
* M-.:                                   Find Tag.            (line  35)
* M-/:                                   Dynamic Abbrevs.     (line  12)
* M-1:                                   Arguments.           (line  15)
* M-;:                                   Comment Commands.    (line  27)
* M-<:                                   Moving Point.        (line  16)
* M-< (Calendar mode):                   Move to Beginning or End.
                                                              (line  21)
* M-<colon>:                             Lisp Eval.           (line  38)
* M-=:                                   Position Info.       (line  50)
* M-= (Calendar mode):                   Counting Days.       (line  10)
* M-= (Dired):                           Comparison in Dired. (line  18)
* M->:                                   Moving Point.        (line  16)
* M-> (Calendar mode):                   Move to Beginning or End.
                                                              (line  24)
* M-? (Nroff mode):                      Nroff Mode.          (line  14)
* M-? (Shell mode):                      Shell Mode.          (line  32)
* M-@:                                   Words.               (line  61)
* M-\:                                   Deletion.            (line  35)
* M-^:                                   Indentation Commands.
                                                              (line  24)
* M-^ (Fortran mode):                    ForIndent Commands.  (line  30)
* M-`:                                   Menu Bar.            (line  10)
* M-a:                                   Sentences.           (line  22)
* M-a (C mode):                          Motion in C.         (line  40)
* M-a (Calendar mode):                   Move to Beginning or End.
                                                              (line  15)
* M-b:                                   Words.               (line  32)
* M-c:                                   Case.                (line  24)
* M-d:                                   Words.               (line  41)
* M-DEL:                                 Words.               (line  50)
* M-DEL (Dired):                         Marks vs Flags.      (line  54)
* M-Drag-Mouse-1:                        Secondary Selection. (line  11)
* M-e:                                   Sentences.           (line  22)
* M-e (C mode):                          Motion in C.         (line  49)
* M-e (Calendar mode):                   Move to Beginning or End.
                                                              (line  18)
* M-f:                                   Words.               (line  32)
* M-g M-n:                               Compilation Mode.    (line  56)
* M-g n:                                 Compilation Mode.    (line  56)
* M-h:                                   Paragraphs.          (line  36)
* M-i <1>:                               Tab Stops.           (line   6)
* M-i:                                   Indentation.         (line  72)
* M-j:                                   Multi-Line Comments. (line   6)
* M-j b (Enriched mode):                 Format Justification.
                                                              (line  48)
* M-j c (Enriched mode):                 Format Justification.
                                                              (line  51)
* M-j l (Enriched mode):                 Format Justification.
                                                              (line  44)
* M-j r (Enriched mode):                 Format Justification.
                                                              (line  45)
* M-j u (Enriched mode):                 Format Justification.
                                                              (line  55)
* M-k:                                   Sentences.           (line  33)
* M-l:                                   Case.                (line  24)
* M-m:                                   Indentation Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* M-m (Rmail):                           Rmail Reply.         (line  64)
* M-Mouse-1:                             Secondary Selection. (line  22)
* M-Mouse-2:                             Secondary Selection. (line  33)
* M-Mouse-3:                             Secondary Selection. (line  26)
* M-n (minibuffer history):              Minibuffer History.  (line  29)
* M-n (Nroff mode):                      Nroff Mode.          (line  14)
* M-n (Rmail):                           Rmail Motion.        (line  55)
* M-n (Shell mode):                      Shell Ring.          (line  10)
* M-o b (Enriched mode):                 Format Faces.        (line  18)
* M-o d (Enriched mode):                 Format Faces.        (line  15)
* M-o i (Enriched mode):                 Format Faces.        (line  22)
* M-o l (Enriched mode):                 Format Faces.        (line  26)
* M-o M-s (Text mode):                   Fill Commands.       (line  46)
* M-o o (Enriched mode):                 Format Faces.        (line  34)
* M-o u (Enriched mode):                 Format Faces.        (line  30)
* M-p (minibuffer history):              Minibuffer History.  (line  29)
* M-p (Nroff mode):                      Nroff Mode.          (line  14)
* M-p (Rmail):                           Rmail Motion.        (line  55)
* M-p (Shell mode):                      Shell Ring.          (line   6)
* M-q:                                   Fill Commands.       (line  21)
* M-q (C mode):                          Other C Commands.    (line  39)
* M-q (Fortran mode):                    ForIndent Commands.  (line  35)
* M-r:                                   Moving Point.        (line  16)
* M-r (minibuffer history):              Minibuffer History.  (line  51)
* M-r (Shell mode):                      Shell Ring.          (line  14)
* M-S (Enriched mode):                   Format Justification.
                                                              (line  51)
* M-s (Gnus Summary mode):               Summary of Gnus.     (line  90)
* M-s (minibuffer history):              Minibuffer History.  (line  51)
* M-s (Rmail):                           Rmail Motion.        (line  68)
* M-s o:                                 Other Repeating Search.
                                                              (line  43)
* M-s w:                                 Word Search.         (line  26)
* M-SPC:                                 Deletion.            (line  35)
* M-t:                                   Transpose.           (line  31)
* M-TAB:                                 Symbol Completion.   (line  10)
* M-TAB (customization buffer):          Changing a Variable. (line  49)
* M-TAB (Incremental search):            Special Isearch.     (line  40)
* M-TAB (Picture mode):                  Tabs in Picture.     (line   6)
* M-TAB (Text mode):                     Text Mode.           (line  36)
* M-TAB, (MS-Windows):                   Windows Keyboard.    (line  45)
* M-u:                                   Case.                (line  24)
* M-v:                                   Scrolling.           (line  81)
* M-v (Calendar mode):                   Scroll Calendar.     (line  34)
* M-w:                                   Other Kill Commands. (line  39)
* M-x:                                   M-x.                 (line  17)
* M-y:                                   Earlier Kills.       (line   6)
* M-z:                                   Other Kill Commands. (line  49)
* M-{:                                   Paragraphs.          (line   6)
* M-{ (Calendar mode):                   Calendar Unit Motion.
                                                              (line  43)
* M-{ (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  72)
* M-|:                                   Single Shell.        (line  35)
* M-}:                                   Paragraphs.          (line   6)
* M-} (Calendar mode):                   Calendar Unit Motion.
                                                              (line  43)
* M-} (Dired):                           Marks vs Flags.      (line  67)
* M-~:                                   Save Commands.       (line  78)
* Mouse-1:                               Mouse Commands.      (line   6)
* Mouse-1 (mode line):                   Mode Line Mouse.     (line  16)
* Mouse-1 (scroll bar):                  Mode Line Mouse.     (line  34)
* Mouse-1 (selection):                   Mouse References.    (line   6)
* Mouse-2:                               Mouse Commands.      (line   6)
* Mouse-2 (GDB breakpoints buffer):      Breakpoints Buffer.  (line  26)
* Mouse-2 (mode line):                   Mode Line Mouse.     (line  23)
* Mouse-2 (selection):                   Mouse References.    (line   6)
* Mouse-3:                               Mouse Commands.      (line   6)
* Mouse-3 (mode line):                   Mode Line Mouse.     (line  26)
* n (Gnus):                              Summary of Gnus.     (line  72)
* n (Rmail):                             Rmail Motion.        (line  55)
* next:                                  Scrolling.           (line  81)
* o (Calendar mode):                     Specified Dates.     (line  34)
* O (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  85)
* o (Dired):                             Dired Visiting.      (line  21)
* o (Occur mode):                        Other Repeating Search.
                                                              (line  32)
* o (Rmail):                             Rmail Output.        (line  20)
* p (Calendar mode):                     To Other Calendar.   (line  11)
* P (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  99)
* p (Gnus):                              Summary of Gnus.     (line  76)
* p (Rmail):                             Rmail Motion.        (line  55)
* p d (Calendar mode):                   General Calendar.    (line  21)
* PageDown:                              Scrolling.           (line  81)
* PageUp:                                Scrolling.           (line  81)
* prior:                                 Scrolling.           (line  81)
* q (Calendar mode):                     General Calendar.    (line  36)
* Q (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line 127)
* q (Gnus Group mode):                   Summary of Gnus.     (line  18)
* q (Rmail summary):                     Rmail Summary Edit.  (line 102)
* Q (Rmail summary):                     Rmail Summary Edit.  (line 102)
* q (Rmail):                             Rmail Basics.        (line  35)
* R (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  55)
* r (Rmail):                             Rmail Reply.         (line  33)
* RET:                                   Inserting Text.      (line  11)
* RET (Dired):                           Dired Visiting.      (line  18)
* RET (GDB breakpoints buffer):          Breakpoints Buffer.  (line  22)
* RET (GDB speedbar):                    Watch Expressions.   (line  28)
* RET (Occur mode):                      Other Repeating Search.
                                                              (line  32)
* RET (Shell mode):                      Shell Mode.          (line  13)
* RIGHT:                                 Moving Point.        (line  16)
* s (Calendar mode):                     Displaying the Diary.
                                                              (line  62)
* S (Calendar mode):                     Sunrise/Sunset.      (line  25)
* s (Dired):                             Dired Updating.      (line  67)
* S (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  70)
* s (Gnus Summary mode):                 Summary of Gnus.     (line  85)
* s (Rmail):                             Rmail Basics.        (line  28)
* S-<TAB> (Help mode):                   Help Mode.           (line  42)
* S-Mouse-2:                             Hideshow.            (line  16)
* S-Mouse-3 (FFAP):                      FFAP.                (line  64)
* S-TAB (customization buffer):          Changing a Variable. (line 103)
* SPC:                                   Completion Commands. (line  56)
* SPC (Calendar mode):                   General Calendar.    (line  31)
* SPC (Dired):                           Dired Navigation.    (line  11)
* SPC (GDB breakpoints buffer):          Breakpoints Buffer.  (line  12)
* SPC (Gnus):                            Summary of Gnus.     (line  49)
* SPC (Rmail):                           Rmail Scrolling.     (line  23)
* t (Calendar mode):                     Writing Calendar Files.
                                                              (line  23)
* T (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line  94)
* t (Dired):                             Marks vs Flags.      (line  76)
* t (Rmail):                             Rmail Display.       (line  12)
* TAB:                                   Completion Commands. (line  29)
* TAB (and major modes):                 Major Modes.         (line   6)
* TAB (completion):                      Completion Example.  (line   6)
* TAB (customization buffer):            Changing a Variable. (line 103)
* TAB (GUD):                             Commands of GUD.     (line 113)
* TAB (Message mode):                    Header Editing.      (line  46)
* TAB (programming modes):               Basic Indent.        (line  16)
* TAB (Shell mode):                      Shell Mode.          (line  20)
* TAB (Text mode):                       Text Mode.           (line  15)
* u (Calendar mode):                     Holidays.            (line  40)
* u (Dired deletion):                    Dired Deletion.      (line  28)
* U (Dired):                             Marks vs Flags.      (line  49)
* u (Dired):                             Marks vs Flags.      (line  40)
* u (Gnus Group mode):                   Summary of Gnus.     (line  33)
* u (Rmail):                             Rmail Deletion.      (line  44)
* UP:                                    Moving Point.        (line  16)
* v (Dired):                             Dired Visiting.      (line  38)
* v (Rmail):                             Rmail Display.       (line  56)
* w (Dired):                             Misc Dired Features. (line  18)
* w (Rmail):                             Rmail Output.        (line  32)
* x (Calendar mode):                     Holidays.            (line  40)
* X (Dired):                             Shell Commands in Dired.
                                                              (line   6)
* x (Dired):                             Dired Deletion.      (line  36)
* x (Rmail):                             Rmail Deletion.      (line  44)
* Z (Dired):                             Operating on Files.  (line 106)
* ~ (Dired):                             Flagging Many Files. (line  34)


File: emacs,  Node: Option Index,  Next: Command Index,  Prev: Key Index,  Up: Top

Command-Line Options Index
**************************

 [index ]
* Menu:

* +LINENUM:                              Action Arguments.    (line  30)
* --background-color:                    Colors.              (line  29)
* --basic-display:                       Misc X.              (line  20)
* --batch:                               Initial Options.     (line  36)
* --border-color:                        Colors.              (line  33)
* --border-width:                        Borders X.           (line  20)
* --color:                               Colors.              (line  51)
* --cursor-color:                        Colors.              (line  37)
* --daemon:                              Initial Options.     (line 100)
* --debug-init:                          Initial Options.     (line 118)
* --directory:                           Action Arguments.    (line  49)
* --display:                             Initial Options.     (line  25)
* --eval:                                Action Arguments.    (line  59)
* --execute:                             Action Arguments.    (line  60)
* --file:                                Action Arguments.    (line   9)
* --find-file:                           Action Arguments.    (line  10)
* --font:                                Font X.              (line  11)
* --foreground-color:                    Colors.              (line  23)
* --fullheight:                          Window Size X.       (line  28)
* --fullscreen:                          Window Size X.       (line  18)
* --fullwidth:                           Window Size X.       (line  32)
* --funcall:                             Action Arguments.    (line  53)
* --geometry:                            Window Size X.       (line  11)
* --help:                                Action Arguments.    (line  71)
* --iconic:                              Icons X.             (line   7)
* --insert:                              Action Arguments.    (line  63)
* --internal-border:                     Borders X.           (line  15)
* --kill:                                Action Arguments.    (line  68)
* --line-spacing:                        Misc X.              (line  12)
* --load:                                Action Arguments.    (line  38)
* --maximized:                           Window Size X.       (line  23)
* --mouse-color:                         Colors.              (line  42)
* --name:                                Resources.           (line  70)
* --no-bitmap-icon:                      Icons X.             (line  12)
* --no-blinking-cursor:                  Misc X.              (line  16)
* --no-desktop:                          Initial Options.     (line 111)
* --no-init-file:                        Initial Options.     (line  75)
* --no-site-file:                        Initial Options.     (line  82)
* --no-splash:                           Initial Options.     (line  87)
* --no-window-system:                    Initial Options.     (line  30)
* --quick:                               Initial Options.     (line  93)
* --reverse-video:                       Colors.              (line  48)
* --script:                              Initial Options.     (line  61)
* --terminal:                            Initial Options.     (line  20)
* --title:                               Title X.             (line  17)
* --user:                                Initial Options.     (line 115)
* --version:                             Action Arguments.    (line  75)
* --vertical-scroll-bars:                Misc X.              (line   8)
* --visit:                               Action Arguments.    (line  11)
* --xrm:                                 Resources.           (line  87)
* -bd:                                   Colors.              (line  32)
* -bg:                                   Colors.              (line  28)
* -bw:                                   Borders X.           (line  19)
* -cr:                                   Colors.              (line  36)
* -D:                                    Misc X.              (line  19)
* -d:                                    Initial Options.     (line  24)
* -daemon:                               Initial Options.     (line  99)
* -f:                                    Action Arguments.    (line  52)
* -fg:                                   Colors.              (line  22)
* -fh:                                   Window Size X.       (line  27)
* -fn:                                   Font X.              (line  10)
* -fs:                                   Window Size X.       (line  17)
* -fw:                                   Window Size X.       (line  31)
* -g:                                    Window Size X.       (line  10)
* -ib:                                   Borders X.           (line  14)
* -L:                                    Action Arguments.    (line  48)
* -l:                                    Action Arguments.    (line  37)
* -lsp:                                  Misc X.              (line  11)
* -mm:                                   Window Size X.       (line  22)
* -ms:                                   Colors.              (line  41)
* -nbc:                                  Misc X.              (line  15)
* -nbi:                                  Icons X.             (line  11)
* -nw:                                   Initial Options.     (line  29)
* -Q:                                    Initial Options.     (line  92)
* -q:                                    Initial Options.     (line  74)
* -r:                                    Colors.              (line  46)
* -rv:                                   Colors.              (line  47)
* -T:                                    Title X.             (line  16)
* -t:                                    Initial Options.     (line  19)
* -u:                                    Initial Options.     (line 114)
* -vb:                                   Misc X.              (line   7)

